4
"INDIAN THOUGHT" SERIES No. 2
BÖLGOED
VĀMANA'S
KÄVYÄLAMKĀRA-SUTRA-VRITTI
Translated into English
BY
GANGANATH JHA
ī
4
Itu
Livisi
POONA,
1
Second Edition, Revised.
X
A VLEK
F
CADEMY
ORIENTAL BOOK AGENCY,
2676
Bjulpy
2676
ST
HV
b
5
9THE ORIENTAL BOOK AGENCY, POONA,
AGENTS FOR
CALCUTTA UNIVERSITY PUBLICATIONS.
Culture and Kultur Race Ori- Prolegomena to
Prolegomena to a History
gins or the Past Unveiled, of Buddhistic Philosophy.
by H. B. Hannah, Rs. 3-12. by B. M. Barua. Rs. 1-8.
Ancient Indian Numismatics Early History of the Vaish-
(Carmichael Leciures, 1921) nava Sect, by Hemchandra
by Bhandarkar.
Raychaudhuri. Rs. 2-13.
(Carmichael Lectures, A History of Indian Logic
1923) by Bhandarkar, Rs. 5.
TheEvolution of Indian Polity,
Rs. 4-14.
Asoka
(Ancient, Mediaeval and
Modern Schools), by Mr.
Satischandra Vidyabhus-
by R. Shama Sastri. Rs. 6.
Ancient Romic Chronology,
by H.Bruce Hannah. Rs.1-8.
Sources of Law and Society
in Ancient India. by
han. With a foreward by Sir
Asutosh Mookerjee. Rs. 15
Manu Smriti, ed. by Ganganath
Jha, 1-V Vols, each 2 Pts.
Rs. 65.
Manu Smriti, Notes, Part I-
Textual-
Rs. 12.
Do. Part 11-Explanatory Rs. 15.
Do. Part Ill-Comparative-
(in the press.)
Inscriptions of Asoka, Bhan-
darkar, Majumdar. Rs. 4-4.
Bhela Samhita.
Rs. 9.
The Theory of Adoption by
Pandit Durvasula Sriram
Sastri.
Rs. 3-12
Position of Women in Hindu
Law, by Dwarka Natha
Mitra,
Rs. 12.
The Theory of Sovereignty
by Ray.
Rs. 10.
Studies in Vedantism
by
Bhattacharya.
Rs. 3-12.
The Study of Patanjali
by S. N. Dasgupta, Rs. 4-8
Hegelianism & Huma Person-
ality, Hiralal Haldar R.3-12
Introduction to Advaita Phi-
losophy, by Kokileswai
Sastri.
Rs. 4-0.
English-Tibetan
Dictionary
by Lama. Dawsamdup Kazı.
Rs. 15.
System of Vedantic Thought
and Culture (An introduc
tion to the Metaphysics of
Absolute Monism of Sankara
School) by M. Sarkar. Rs. 7.
The Original and Developed A Grammar of the Tibetan
Doctrines of Indian Buddhism
by Ryukan Kimura Rs. 3
Nareschandra Sen. Rs. 1-
Political History of Ancient
India. (From the Accession
of Parikshit to the extinc-
tion of the Gupta Dynasty),
by H. Raychaudhuri. Revi-
sed
Rs. 7-8
International Law & Custom
in Ancient India, by Pra-
mathanath Banerjee. Rs. 4.
Economic Condition of An-
cient India, by I. N.
Samaddar.
Rs. 3.
Vishnudharmottaram, Part II}
by Stella Kramrisch. Re. 1.
Some Problems of Indian
Literature, by Prof. M..
Winternitz.
Rs. 2 8.
Some Contribution of South
India to Indian Culture
by S. K. Aiyangar. Rs. 6.
Comparative Religion by Prof.
A. A. Macdonell.
The Kamala Lectures on Indian
Ideals in Education, & Art,
by Annie Besant. Rs. 1-8.
System of Buddhistic
Thought, by Yamakami.
Rs. 15.
Rs. 3.
Prakrit Dhammapada, by B.
M. Barua.
Rs. 5.
The History of Pre-Buddhis-
tic Indian Philosophy, by
B. M. Barua. Rs. 10-8.
Language, by H. Bruce
Hannah,
R₁ 114
Please write for complete CatalogueAll rights reserved by the publisher,
15
PRINTED AT THE EVERYMANS PRESS, MADRAS.
PUBLISHED BY
DR. N. G. SARDESAI,
For the Oriental Book Agency, 15, Shukrawar, Poona City.
3
J
1PREFATORY NOTE.
The Kavyalamkara-Sutras, here translated, are by Vamana,
who also wrote the Vritti or short commentary on the Sutras.
He is believed to have flourished in Kashmir between the
second half of the Seventh Century and the second half of the
Ninth Century A. D. This work is one of the oldest of the
systematic treatises on Poetics; its Opinions receiving very
respectful attention in all great works on rhetoric, including the
Dhvanyaloka and the Kavyaprakasha. This Vamana is not the
same as the author of the 'Kashika' on Panini's Sutras; as this
latter flourished before Houen-Thsang came to India, in the
beginning of the Seventh Century; while our Vamana makes
quotations from the work of Bhavabhuti who flourished in the
latter half of that Century.
This translation appcared at first in 'Indian Thought Series'
and in reprints therefrom. It is now being published again, in a
some what revised form; for this Second Edition, my thanks
are duc to Dr. N. G. Sardesai of the Oriental Book Agency,
Poona, and to Mr. N. N. Kulkarnı, B. A. (Hons.) for carefully
going through the proofs.
The University, I
Allahabad.
March 25, 1928. f
GANGANATHA JHA.ta
CHAPTER I. Constituents of Poetry
Section 1. Uses of Poetry
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER II. Defects
"
11. (a) Who is entitled
14
III-
Section 1. Defects of words
CHAPTER III. Qualities
to study the science
(b) Diction
Auxilliaries of
Poetry
2 Forms of Poetry
+1
....
Section 1. (a) Difference between
quality" and
ornament" or figure.
II. Ideal qualities
CHAPTER IV. Figures of Speech
(b) Verbal qualities
.. 16-24
II. (a) Defects of sentence. 24-28
(b) Meanings of sentence 29-35
Section 1. Verbal Figures.
CHAPTER V. Practical Suggestions
II. Ideal figures of speech.
III. Modifications of simile.
Section 1. Poetical Conventions
II. Correct forms of words
***
PAGES PAGES
1-15
--
1-3
3-4
4- 8
8-12
.. 13.15
36-37
of Style.. 37-46
.. 46-53
.. 16-35
54-62
62-71
72-89
...36-55
89-95
95-126
54-89
.. 89-126
YA
¦
3
OlyTHE KAVYALAMKĀRA SUTRAS OF VÄĀMANA.
WITH HIS OWN GLOSS THE Kavipriya
English Translation
CHAPTER I
The Constituents of Poetry"
Section (1)
THE USES OF POETRY
Having bowed down to the Supreme Light, Vāmana proceeds
to prepare a brief Commentary, the air, upon
his own
Kavyalamkāra Sūtras.
1. Poetry becomes acceptable by reason of embellish-
ments.
'Poetry ' becomes acceptable by reason of embellishments.
The word 'poetry' in reality applies to such 'word' and 'subject-
matter' as are adorned or beautified by Diction (or Qualities of Style)
and Embellishments; but in the present context it is used in its
secondary and much wider sense, denoting 'word' and 'subject-
matter' without any qualification,
>
NOTE here defines Poetry primarily as 'such word and subject-matter
as are beautified by diction and figures of speech' and secondarily as mere word
and subject matter.' By older writers it has been declared that Poetry has the 'word'
for its body and the subject-matter' for its soul; but, the author of the
adds, the 'subject-matter should be such as is relished by people with poetic
instincts Later writers, among others the author of the eff have
'described Foetry as a being having the 'word' and 'subject-matter' for his body,
excellences of suggestion or implication for his soul and the 'Figures for his
ornaments. The author of the TT defines Poetry as 'such word and
subject matter as are free from all defects, and adorned by diction, and he does
not find the presence of 'Figures of Speech' a necessary element, in this he
has the support of the , which declares-Even when adorned by Figures
Poetry would not be poetry if it had no diction or Quality of style. The 'absence
of defects' comes in only as a negative property Poetry, thus, according to these
writers must have some excellent subject-matter expressed in words fit for convey-
ing the desired meaning, that the meaning should be only such as is suggested-
and not directly expressed.-s not (at least according to many writers) a necessary
condition it has been made the condition of Foetry of the first class only
It is in view of all this that the TFT has defined Poetry as that word
which expresses an elegant subject matter' and this coincides with what the
dhvani has said with regard to word being the body and a sahṛdayavāghya
subject-matter the Soul of poetry.'
7
●
M
*2
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
+
What is an Embellishment' ?
[L 1.2–
2. Beauty is 'Embellishment.'
'Embellishment' primarily is synonymous (in the present
context) with the act of embellishing and it is only in the secondary
(instrumental) sense of that which embellishes-that the term 18
applied to Simile and the other 'Figures of Speech'.
NOTE. From this P it is clear that with
does not make
the presence of Figures a necessary condition; as reading the two Sutras
together, it is clear that what makes Poetry acceptable is only the presence of
elegance, Diction coming in only as a sine qua non.
3. Embellishment (Elegance) proceeds from the
avoiding of defects and the adopting of qualities
of style and figures of speech.
4. And these are possible only through the Science.
It is only when one has learnt from the Science of Poetics
what the defects are, and what the qualities and figures are, that he
can avoid the one and adopt the other.
What is the desirable result to be accomplished by means of
Poetry with elegance, that one should put forth such efforts
towards its accomplishment ?
5. Poetry, when excellent, accomplishes perceptible
as well as imperceptible results, bringing about,
as it does, pleasure and fame.
When Poetry is good, it accomplishes a perceptible result in
the form of the pleasure that it gives; it also brings about an
imperceptible result in the shape of 'fame".
To this end we have the following verses:---
*They have declared the composition of good Poetry to be the
road to fame; and similarly the composition of bad poetry, the
ridiculous attempt of unqualified poets. the road to disrepute.'I 2 3]
STUDENTS OF THE SCIENCE OF POFTRY
The learned have declared that Fame leads to Heaven lasting
as long as the world lasts; and that Disrepute leads to such places
(in hell) as are totally devoid of light'.
<
C
It is thus for the purposes of obtaining fame and avoiding dis-
repute that great poets should study the science of Poetics."
Nore ~~- Cf. kāvyaprakāśa :-
'Poetry tends to bring fame, wealth, knowledge of world-usage, removal of
evils, immediate highest pleasure, and advice in the most agreeable manner.
;
3
Section (2)
[A] WHO IS ENTITLED TO STUDY THE SCIENCE.
1. Poets are-(a)
grass
The words discontented' and 'feeding on grass
are used
figuratively. The two kinds of Poets are-(1) The hypercritical
sceptic who is possessed of discriminative intelligence (and re-
quires only to be guided properly); and (2) the vulgar person who
is absolutely devoid of the faculty of discrimination.
↓
-(a) 'Discontented,' and (b) 'Feeding on
1
m
2. It is the former of these who by reason of their
being possessed of discrimination, are to be
instructed:
3. and not the latter, who are of the contrary charac-
ter (possessed of no intelligence).
Being by their nature absolutely devoid of discriminating intelli-
gence, the vulgar cannot be taught; as what is inherent in one's
very nature cannot be removed.
It may be objected that the Science of Poetics being thus in-
tended for the few, and thus not benefitting all persons, wherefore
should it be sought after at all? In answer to this we have the next
I4
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[I 2 4
4. The Science could be of no use to the insignificant
(non-intelligent vulgar persons.)
A corroborative instance is cited-
5.
The seed (though capable of cleaning the
water) cannot clean the mud.
NOTE The
thus enumerates the characteristic qualities necessary
in the poet(1) Power-Genius, (2) Cleverness acquired by a careful observa-
tion of the world and the study of poetry and the sciences, (3) Prac ice under the
guidance of a teacher well-versed in the Science of Poetics.'
[3] rīti – DICTION.
–
Having described the persons entitled to the study of the
Science of Poetics, the proceeds next to explain what is meant
by , Diction,
6.
Diction is the very soul of Poetry;-just as the Soul
is to the Body so is Diction to Poetry.
What is this 'Diction'?
7. It is the particular arrangement of words that
constitutes Diction
What is this particular arrangement' ?
8. The particularity' of arrangement consists in the
'qualities of style (to be described later on)
9. Diction has been classed under three heads:
(a) 'vaidarbhī,' (b) 'gauḍīyā' and (c) 'pāñcālī. '
A question is raised-Do the 'Qualities of Style' in Poetry
proceed from different countries, like so many material products-
that they should derive their names from the names of countries
(vidarbha, gauḍa and pāñcāla) ? It is not so because ----
10. The names are due to the fact of particular 'quali-
ties of style' being met with in particular countries.
"
The diction is so called, not becase the country of
vidarbha has any effect upon poetry, but simply by reason of the fact
T
}1 2 1
that this particula d et on
use among the poets of that country.
4
D CTION
5
n ts true form is found to be most in
The author proceeds to define these Dictions in terms of the
Qualities of Style' -
4
7
11. The ff is replete with all the 'Qualities of
Style'-
4
That Diction which abounds in all the Qualities of Style —
Floridity, Lucidity and the like, is called 'fi.' In connection
'àſi.'
with this we have the following verses: That Diction is called
which is untouched by even the slightest Defect, which is
replete with all Qualities and which is sweet like the notes of
the lute."
* Even when the speaker is present. the subject-matter near
at hand, and the science of words and their usage also well-known,
-that, in the absence whereof, sentences do not flow in honeyed
accents, is that Diction (which is called the aff).'
As an example of this we have the following from the
śākuntala Act II. 6 :----
7
gāinnāṃ mahiṣā nipānasalilaṃ śrṛṅgaihustāhitam
chāyābaddhakadasvakaṃ mṛgakulaṃ romanthamabhyasyatu |
viśrabdhaiḥ kriyatāṃ varāhapatibhirmustākṣattiḥ paravale
viśrānti labhatāmidaṃ ca śithilajyānandhamasmanuḥ ||
[ Let the buffaloes wallow in the watter, frequently striking it
with their horns; let the flock of deer ruminate in groups settled
under the shades of the tree; may the huge boars fearlessly uproot
the grass in the pools; and may my bow also with its string loosened
rest in peace!']
NOTE--The
is that which contains words and letters suggestive of
all the Qualities of Style-Sweetness, Floridity and Lucidity. (See
Com bālabodhinī 528 First Fd.)
RI6
12
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[I 2 12
The me abounds in the Qualities of Floridity
' gauḍīyā
and Brilliancy.
4
The diction is that which abounds in long compounds
and harsh-sounding words, which are suggestive of the qualities of
'Floridity' and 'Brilliancy' (to be described later on); it is totally
devoid of the qualities of 'Sweetness' and 'Softness' (see below).
On this we have the following verse-
* People learned in the Science of Diction call that Diction
which consists of long compounds and high-sounding words,
and which abounds in the qualities of Floridity and Brilliancy.'
Example-
#
→
dordaṇḍāñcita candraśekharadhanuhuṇḍāvabhaṅgoyata~
ṭaṃkāradhvanirāryacāla caritaprastāvanāḍiṇḍimaḥ |
drākparyastakapālasampuṭamilahahmāṇḍabhāṇḍādara-
bhrāmyatpiṇḍita caṇḍimā kathamaho nāthāpi viśrāmyati ||
( mahāvīracarita I. 54.)
[The twanging sound that emanates from the broken stick of
Śiva's bow, wielded in his long arms, is the trumpet-sound introdu-
cing into the world the boyish feats of my brother: even now it
does not cease, having its reverberation enhanced by its rumblings
through the interstices of the pieces of the Universe rent asunder by
the terrific explosion.']
Example-
13. The art is endowed with the qualities of Sweet-
ness and Soltness,
Being totally devoid of Floridity and Brilliancy, this has no
harsh-sounding words, and is rather tame. Says the verse :--
"The wise ones have named that Diction
rather tame, resembling the style of the Puraāṇas,
sweet'.
grāmesminpathikāya pāntha vasatinaivādhunā dīyate
rātrāvatra vihāramaṇḍatale pānthaḥ prasupto yuvā |
which sounds
and is soft andI 2. 201
DICTION
tenotthāya khalena garjati ghane smṛtvā priyāṃ tatkṛtaṃ
yenāvyāpi karaṅkaṇḍapatanāśī janastiṣṭhati ||
śārṅgavarapaddhatiḥ 3893.
+
['O Traveller, now in this village no wayfarer is allowed to have
lodgings A youthful traveller, was once, sleeping at night under
the roof of this pavilion; and when the clouds thundered, that
wicked youth woke up, and happening to remember his beloved, did
something, by reason whereof the people, even now, continue to
remain under the dread of the falling of the skeleton.']
It is on these three Dictions that 'Poetry' takes its stand; just
as the painting has its substratum in the lines drawn on the
canvas,
14. From among these three it is the first (the) that
deserves to be adopted; as it has all the qualities;
15. and not the other two (metal and natâî); as they
have only a few qualities.
16. Some writers have held that these latter two also
have to be practised, as they serve the purpose
of steps leading up to the ff.
17. But this is not right; for the real thing (the proper
Diction) cannot be attained by one who practises
with the unreal (the improper Diction).
[When one does not practise what he wants, he cannot attain it.]
18. [As for example] if the weaver practises weaving
with jute, he does not attain expertness in the
weaving of silk.
vaidarbhī' when there are no
19. The ff is called
compound words.
20. It is in this pure à that the fullness of the
excellence of subject-matter becomes clearly ap-
preciable.
8
pureKAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
(1 2 2
21. In fact by becoming related to this diction, even
the slightest excellence of subject-matter becomes
appreciable [to say nothing of the fulness of
excellence].
On this point we have the following veises :-
'There is an excellent arrangement of words (Diction) in which
even when there is nothing, there appears to be something; reaching
the ears of good men, it gives pleasure, entering their hearts like a
flow of nectar,
That attaining which in speech, the excellence of the words
shines forth, wherein even the unreal thing acquires a reality, is
that ff Diction which produces a peculiar exhilarating effect on
the hearts of all men with poetic sensibilility."
+
22. The said 'excellence of subject-matter' also has
been called ff; it rests upon the ff Diction.
To the subject-matter the name, which primarily belongs to
the Diction, is applied only secondarly (or figuratively.)
For 'Gunas' or 'Qualities of Style' refer to Chapter III,
Sections and 2.
Section (3)
THE AUXILLIARIES OF POETRY.
Having explained Diction, the proceeds to describe the
'Auxilliaries' of Poetry.
1. The Auxilliaries of Poetry are-(a) the World, (b)
the Science, and (c) Miscellanies.
2, By 'world' is meant the operation or action of the
world (of animate and inanimate beings].
3. By Science is meant that (Science of Poetry)
which is preceded by the Science of words, the
4
4I 3 5]
THE AUXILL ARIES OF POETRY
Kosas, Prosody, the Arts. the Science of Erotics,
and the Science of Politics.
The Science of Poetry is said to be preceded by these
sciences, as the knowledge of every one of these is needed in the
writing of poetry.
In what manner each of these becomes an 'auxilliary' is now
shown
4. Purity or Correctness of Words proceeds from (the
knowledge of) the Science of Words.
By the aid of the Science of Words. i.e., grammar, we assure
ourselves of the correct forms of words; as it is only the correct
form of words that is used by poets fearlessly.
5. From Kosas proceeds the Knowledge of the Mea-
nings of Words,
Coming across a word capable of being used in the piece he is
composing, if the poet were not quite sure of what it meant, he
could not make up his mind as to whether he should use that word
or give it up; and this uncertainty would hamper the work of
composition. Consequently it becomes necessary for the poet to
make himself sure of the exact meanings of words, with the help of
lexicons. It is not right to utilise these Thesauruses for the purpose
of making use of extraordinary words never before used; such
words and expressions as are seldom used should never be used
in poetry.
Question : If one is to use only such words as are in use
already, whence could there be any uncertainty as
to the
meaning of words mentioned above?"
Answer It is just possible that of a word that is in use
already, the writer may have only a vague idea; e. g., in the case of
the word it may be that he knows that it is the name of the
cloth-knot over the thigh, and he may be in doubt as to whether this
2
p10
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[136-
referred to the cloth-knot of the woman or the man; this doubt
could be set aside only by the help of such declarations as afiðr
is the name of the cloth-knot over the thigh of the woman '-
occurring in the
for instance.
Well, if the word can apply to the woman's cloth only,
how do you explain the following use of the word (where it
applies to the man's clothing) :—
4
The cloth-knot mentioned before by some one was loosened
by the enlargement of the stomach by excellent and variegated
feeding '-?"
Such use must be regarded either as wrong, or as only
figurative.
6. The Science of Prosody helps in removing all
doubts with regard to metre.
Though as a matter of fact the knowledge of metres comes by
practice at poetical composition, yet doubts very often arise with
regard to the correctness or otherwise of those metres that are
arranged in accordance with the number and place of the vowel-
sounds; and these doubts can be set aside only by the study of the
Science of Prosody.
7. By the study of the Science of Arts follows the
knowledge of the essence of the Arts.
The 'Arts' here meant are those of singing, dancing, painting
and the like; scientific treatises on these have been written by
Panfere and others: from the proper study of these treatises comes
the knowledge of the arts; unless one knows the arts, it is not
possible for him to compose anything artistic.
8. From the Science of Erotics follows the know-
ledge of the ways of love.
It is the 'Ways of Love' that form the subject matter of most
poetical compositions.1 3 3]
9.
THE AUXILL Ar es of PoetrY
From the Science of Politics proceeds the know-
ledge of proper (expedient) and improper (or
inexpedient) conduct.
*Proper or Expedient Conduct consists in the due employment
of the six methods' (of Peace and Quarrel, Marching and Halting,
Bifurcation and Association); and conduct other than this is 'im-
proper' or 'inexpedient'; unless one knows these, one cannot
rightly describe the actions of the hero and the counter-hero.
11
10. From the Science of Politics again follow the
intricacies of the plot.
The 'plot' or 'story' forms the body of Poetry; and it is only
when the poet is versed in the Science of Politics that he can weave
out an intricate plot, consisting as this does of the more or less
powerful and effective employment of the methods of action.
In the manner shown above, the uses of other Sciences may
also be pointed out.
11. The Miscellanies' consist of-(a) Knowledge
of what is to be done; (b) Application;
(c) Attending upon superiors; (6) Deliberation
or Circumspection; (3) Imagination; and (ƒ)
Attention.
13.
12. Knowledge of what is to be done' consists in
being acquainted with poetical works [of others];
as it is thus alone that one can acquire the power
of comprehension.
G
Application consists in engaging one-self in the
composing of poetical pieces.
By this means one acquires proficiency in the art of composi-
tion,12
14.
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
By this means the superior knowledge of the teacher comes
over to the pupil.
15. Deliberation consists in the insertion and dele-
tion of words.
(
[1 3 4
Attending on superiors' consists of attendance
upon a teacher capable of imparting instruction
in the art of poetic composition.
€
On this point we have the following verses:-
5
"As long as there is uncertainty in the mind, the process of
insertion and deletion of words should continue; when, on this, a
word becomes ultimately fixed upon, the composition is complete.'
When the proper words are so carefully chosen that not one
of them can be altered,-then alone we have what the composition-
experts have called the Perfect Composition".
16. In Imagination lies the very seed of Poetry,
The 'Seed of Poetry' is an ante-natal capacity of the Mind,
without which no poetry is possible; or even if possible, it is only
ridiculous.
17. 'Attention' consists of the one-pointedness or
fixity of the mind.
It is only when the mind is drawn in, away from all external
things, that it can grasp the innermost essence of things.
18.
This fixity of mind depends upon time and place.
19. The place must be solitary [away from crowds].
20. The time is the last or fourth quarter of the night.
It is in a solitary place and at the time of the early dawn that
the mind is calm and peaceful, free from all other things.
NoTE.Among the requisites of Poetry, the kāvyaprakāśa (kārikā 1 3) ecurnerates
the following, remarking that it is all these combined-and not each one indepen-
dently of the rest-that makes the successful Poet-(1) Poetic Power (Genius),
(2) Wide Knowledge born of a careful study of Objects, of Sciences and of Poems
(3) the practice of the teachings of men practised in writing Poetry.1 3 251
THE FORMS OF POETRY
Having described the auxillanes of Poetry, the proceeds
to describe the particular forms of Poetry -
21. Poetry is in Prose and in Verse.
It is the Prose that is mentioned first: as it is extremely
difficult to compose Poetry in prose, chiefly on account of its
indefinite and strictly undefinable character; it has been declared
that 'Prose constitutes the touchstone of poets.'
22. Prose is cf three kinds (a) vṛttagandhi (b) cūrṇa (e) utkalikāprāya.
The definition of each of these follows :—
23. The
3
Prose is that which bears parts of verse
or metrical composition.
Example- pātālatālutalavāsiu dānaveṣu' [" among the Dānavas inm
habiting the innermost recesses of the nether world"]; in this
phrase we recognise a complete part of a verse in the agradez
metre.
24. The Prose is that in which the compounds are
not very long, and which contains soft and sweet.
words.
Example--
abhyāso di karmaṇāṃ kauśalamāvahati |
na di sakṛtripātamātreṇodābendurapi grāvaṇi nimnatāmādadhāti |
['Practice lends perfection to actions: even a drop of water
falling but once cannot produce any impression on the stone."]
25 The is the opposite of the .
It contains long compounds and abounds in harsh-sounding
words.
Example-
kuliśa śikha rakha ranakharacayapracaṇḍa capeṭāpāṭitamattamātaṅgakumbhasthalagalanmadacchaṭācchurita-
cārukesarabhārabhāsuramukhe kesariṇi |
'The lion having its face brightened by the beautiful mass of
hair on its neck, which is besmeared with the ichor flowing from14
Kavyālamkāra Sūtra
[I 3 26
the temple of infuriated elephants felled by a stroke of the claw,
as powerful and terrible with nails as the points of the thunder-
bolt.']
NOTE.-Theor (chap. VI 330.) mentions a fourth Prose, called
the or Prose in which each word occurs distinct from another, like so
many pearls strung on to a necklace' This would appear to be that Prose in
which there are absolutely no compounds. His right in not mentioning this
kind, as this form of composition has a more or less theoretical existence only.
26. The verse is of many kinds.
There are many kinds of verse, the diversity being based upon
the diversity of metres; some of these, called the 'Regular,' have
all the four feet similar; others called the 'Semi-regular', have the
first and third feet similar. and so also the second and the fourth,
while the rest called the 'Iregular', have all the feet dissimilar.
.
27. Poetry again is (a) Stray or Sporadic and
(b) Connected or Cumulative.
28. Of these the latter is possible only after the former
has been accomplished; just as the crest of
flower-garlands' can be made only after the
garlands have been prepared.
It is only after one has acquired efficiency in the composing
of stray verses that he can write continuous poems of many verses.
The proceeds to show that it is not right to restrict oneself
to stray verses only, as some people are prone to do.
29. The Stray Verse never shines,-resembling a
single atom of fire.
In this connection we have the following declaration : ---
"There is no charm attaching to verses which are not con-
nected; just as a fire-atom by itself is never brilliant."
30. Among 'Connected Poems' again, the ten kinds
of Dramatic Poem are superior;1 3 32]
31.
THE FORMS OF POETRY
15
As the Dramatic Poem is possessed of varied
interests, presenting a combination of many
peculiar charms; just like the cloth of variegated
colour, which is specially beautiful by reason of
the combination of many colours.
32. The other forms (of Poetry in Verse) proceed from
this (Dramatic Poem)
All forms of Verse are the product of the Dramatic Poem.
As for those other kinds of Poetry that are known as the land
the ear (in Prose) and the (in Verse), the author has
not given definitions of these, as the mere definition of these in
detail is not very pleasant; these definitions must be learnt
from other works.
NOTE.-The
supplies the definitions herein omitted, See Chap, VI,
kathā (VI. 332-333) ākhyāyikā (VI. 334), mahākāvya (VI. 315)Y
16
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
CHAPTER II
DEFECTS
Section (1)
DEFECTS OF WORDS
The form and constituents of Poetry having been described,
it becomes necessary to know what are the 'Defects of poetry,
which mar its beauty, in order to be able to avoid them; hence the
now proceeds to describe the defects-
1. Defects are the opposite of Qualities. [Described
later on, in Chap. III].
2. And they are known by implication.
That is, when we know the Qualities, we know, by implication,
also the Defects which are only the opposites of Qualities.
"Then, why are they treated of separately ?"
3. The separate treatment is for the sake of clearness.
The Defects are treated of and described and defined separ
rately, and not left to be inferred by implication: as it is only thus
that they can be rightly understood, and avoided.
The proceeds to describe the Defects of Words--
4. The defective word is-(a) Grammatically Wrong;
(b) Unmelodious; (c) Vulgar; (d) Unknown ;
and (e) Meaningless, or Superfluous.
+
Each of these is severally explained-
5. The grammatically wrong' is that which is
contrary to rules of grammar.
Example-Such words as, art
where the correct
form should have been anyatkārakavaiparthyama the t coming in by pāṇini's
sūtra-- aṣaḍhayanṛtīyāsthasyānyasya &c., &c. VI. 3. 99,
IL
i • AhII 1 8]
6
The
sant to the ear.
Such a word is not only unpleasant to the ear; it also disturbs
the proper flow of the sentence.
Example-
DETECTS OF WORDS
unmelodious word is that which is unplea-
acūcūrapaṇḍi kapolayoste kāntidravaṃ drāgviśadaḥ śaśāṅka: |
['O angry one the clear moon has stolen the lustre of your
cheeks.]
[Here the words aga and are 'unmelodious."]
7. The vulgar' word is that which is used by the
common people only [and not by the learned or
in learned works].
G
Example-
"
kaṣṭaṃ ṛthaṃ rośita phatkṛtya | Oh | how puffingly she cries ]
[Here the word
is 'vulgar.]
17
<
To the same category belong such words as æ (tank), up
(cheek), and the like.
Example-
8. The unknown' word is that which is used only in
learned (technical) treatises (and not in common
usage].
kiṃ bhāṣitena bahunā rūpaskandhasya sanma mena guṇāḥ |
guṇānantarīyakaṃ ca premeti na mestyupālambhaḥ ||
[What is the use of my saying much? I know I am wanting
in the excellence of the beauty-aspect of IDEA; and as love also is
the invariable concomitant of that excellence. I do not complain (of
that want of love).'"]
The word '' (Beauty-aspect of Idea) is a technicality
of the Buddhistic philosophy; and the word aaya (invariably
concomitant) is a technicality of the philosophy and neither
of these is used in ordinary parlance (in the sense in which they are
used here).
318
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[II 19
9. The Meaningless or Superfluous' word is that
which is added only for the sake of filling up
gaps of sentences.
There are many indeclinable particles that are inserted in
sentences (specially in verse) simply for the sake of filling up the
gaps in the metre; it is not only the indeclinable, but other words
also that come under this category; by the maxim of the 'cake and
the stick' (by which it is meant that when two things are in the
same predicament they are to be treated alike).
Example-
uditastu hāstikavinīlamayaṃ timiraṃ nipīya kiraṇaiḥ savitā |
['The Sun has risen, after having drunk up, with his rays, the
darkness which was as densely black as the elephant."]
Here the particle has been added only for the sake of filling
up the requisite number of syllables in the metre; and it does not
serve the purpose of lending a graceful form to the sentence; a
word that does serve to give a graceful form to the sentence cannot
be regarded as 'superfluous'; this is the exception that has to be
borne in mind. We have an instance of this in the following:
ma khalviha gatāgatā nayanagocaraṃ meṃ gatā|
['While she was passing this way and that, she did not come
within the range of my vision']
[Here the phrase
lends grace to the sentence.]
NOTE. Our author has very rightly distinguished the defects of the word, from
the defects of the meanings of words, which follow in 10 el, seq. The kāvyaprakāśa
and the ne have dealt with both kids together.
The proceeds to describe the Defects of the meaning or
denotation of words.
10. [The Defective words are also]-(a) having a
different meaning, (b) having a fanciful meaning,
(c) difficult of comprehension, (d) indecorous and
(e) obscure.II 1 12]
DEFECTS OF WORDS
19
being
The words 'the Defective Word'-have to be supplied from
4: the singular number of the word of the former
made to undergo the change into the plural in view of the plural
number in the present the construction thus being-the
Defective words are &c., &c.*
The proceeds to define each of these defects severally.
11. A word is said to have a different meaning
when it is used in a sense entirely different from
its accepted denotation. [The sense intended to
be conveyed being that which is deducible only
from the etymology of the word).
(
The ordinary misuse of a word-of the word (jar) for the
word qe (cloth) is not what is meant by the a: as such usage is
too manifestly wrong to be mentioned.
Example--
te duḥkhamuccāvacamāvahanti ye prasparanti priyasaṅgamānām |
[ Those people experience great pain who recall to their minds
the meeting of dear ones.]
Here the word aaga which is used generally in the sense of
'doing,' has been used in the sense of 'carrying (experiencing),
which has to be deduced from the etymology of the word; and
secondly the word which means to forget, has been
used in the sense of 'remember' or to 'recall to the mind'; which
latter meaning can be deduced from the e'ymology of the word
which consists of the prefix (excellent) and (to remember)
12. That word is said to have a fanciful meaning
6
which is used in a sense that is only assumed
(and thus can be guessed out with great difficulty).
That is to say, the meaning desired to be conveyed is such as
the word is never known to bear.
Example-
sapachi paṅkivihaṅgamanāmabhṛttanayasaṃvalitaṃ balaśālinā |
vipulaparvatavarṣiśitaiḥ śaraiḥ sainyamukatā jitam ||
"KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[II 1 2-
[The army of monkeys led by the sons of u was defeated
by the Conqueror of Indra by means of sharp arrows showering
thousands of mountains."]
20
Here the word
'Sons of u in the following manner.
ay can, be made to signify the
means 'ten', for which another Sanskrit word is .
or name of a particular bird
which means 'wheel'; the
which is expressed by the
meaning and the rest of the
(1)
(2) fg means 'bird', the #
is ar which contains the word a
or 'bearer' of that is the chariot
word ry. Thus then the word
compound , we get the name at whose tanayas (sons) are
and wea" by whom the army of monkeys was guided.
Then again, the word fe can be applied to the
'Conqueror of , in the following, manner-The word
denotes the (owl) as well as and thus the words
and being regarded as synonymous r is spoken of as
ulūkajina,
It may be objected that if such use of words is defective, we
should have to reject the use of such words also as rugama, (which
is applied to the war bird by reason of its name containing
the word which is a 'limb', we of the Chariot (4).
The use of such words, however, is not objectionable, as there
are some words which though originally perhaps employed in the
required sense only indirectly, have yet come to be so far accepted
in common usage that they are regarded as having their remote and
indirect indications, an, well recognised ().
13. That word is said to be difficult of comprehen-
sion which is used in such a meaninig as is not
generally known.
*
A word that has more than one signification, only one of which
is generally known--if such a word be used with a signification
other than this last one, then it is said to be 'difficult of comprehen-
sion'.II 1 17,
Example
✔
DEFECTS OF WORDS
sahasragorivānīkaṃ duḥsahaṃ bhavataḥ paraḥ |
[Your army is as insufferable by your enemies as the
of indra.]
21
army
Here the word ay is used to denote and this meaning
can be got at by taking the word '' occurring at the end of the
compound in the sense of 'Eye-Indra having a 'thousand' age
Eyes' m; and though the word '' does signify the Eye also,
yet this is not the signification that is generally attached to it in
the ordinary usage of poets.
14. The indecorous' word is that-(a) which has,
among other significations, one that is coarse or
vulgar; and (b) which brings to the mind some-
thing indecent.
(a) It often happens that though the word is used in a harmless
sense, yet it has other significations which are vulgar: the use of
such a word is regarded as 'indecorous'; e. g. the word asa
which signifies glory or effulgence, and also the human excreta.
(b) There are words which, though in their form quite harmless,
are found, when taken by parts, to be indicative of something
indecent; e. g. the word kar.
15. (a) The concealed or (b) the indicated or (c) the
entirely shrouded,-are not regarded as 'indeco-
rous.'
6
16. That word is concealed whose vulgar significa-
tion is not generally known.
E. g. the word ; the only signification of this word that
is generally known is that referring to 'difficulty' or 'obstacle";
while that referring to the bodily organ is not generally known.
17. The indicated word is that which has its indirect
(vulgar) signification only remotely indicated.22
[11 11
E. the word
8-₁
which signifies the land of birth, and
thereby only very remotely indicates the organ of generation; such
words connot be regarded as 'indecorous.'
18. The shrouded' word is that whose vulgar significa-
tion is entirely veiled by the ordinary usage of
men.
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
E. g., Such words as [which literally means One
whose...is excellent has become accepted in usage as signifying
'beautiful'] : [lit. one who has" but accepted as
meaning 'sister'];-q [means....., but is generally accepted
as signifying worship - [signifies
];-~-abhipreta
some connection
with ghosts, but is used in the sense of 'desired" or' intended' ];-
Art [lit. 'one whose sexual instincts are low', is used in the
sense of 'Virgin'];- [originally meaning 'desires of a preg-
nant woman', but generally used in the sense of Desire]. In
this connection we have the following verse
'It is not proper to hunt out the improper signification of words
that are accepted in ordinary usage with such significations entirely
shrouded from view; for instance, what man can have any notion of
vulgarity or impropriety with regard to the word f. ?
(
19. The Indecorous' is of three kinds as giving rise
to-(a) shame, (b) disgust, or (e) forebodings of
evil.
Some words by their indecorous significations produce shame,
8. 8., vākāṭavam hiraṇyaretā: [where the last word of the compound has
a vulgar meaning] and so forth; some produce disgust, e. g
(the last word having a vulgar signification]; while others
bring to the superstitious mind forebodings of evil: e. g., GÑA:
[which means established, and also dead).
€
20. The Obscure' word is that whose signification is
got at only remotely, or in an indirect round-
about manner.II 1 22]
DEFECTS OF WORDS
That is to say, that word which is used in a sense that does
not proceed from it directly, but is only connected with it (and
hence indicated by it) in a very remote or in-direct manner.
Example-
dakṣātmajādayitavallabhavedikānāṃ |
jyotsnājuṣā jalalavāstaralaṃ patanti ||
[*Drops of water are falling upon platforms of silver shining in
moon-light'.
The fact that the first line signifies the 'silver platform' can be
known only in a very round-about manner
23
(1) a
daughters of
'stars'; (2) the aor 'beloved*
of the stars is the Moon: (3) H (=beloved) is synonymous with
kāntā and the compound thus cores to indicate the word candrakāntā
which is one of the many names of silver.
21.
Such words also are called 'obscure' as are used
in a sense not their own by usage.
As the meaning of such words cannot be easily comprehended.
Example-
kālīguṇasthāna maninditāyāḥ |
['The waist of the irreproachable one."]
That the word aangrenas which is literally means the place
of the girdle-zone, means 'waist' cannot be found out easily.
22. The last two defects (Indecorous and Obscure)
pertain to sentences also.
Example-(a) of the Indecorous Sentence.--
( 1 ) na sādhanotiyāṃ syātkalatra sukhadāyinī | [sāvana is the male organ of
generation]
(2) parārthabahakakṣāṇāṃ yatsatyaṃ pelavaṃ dhanam | [pelavaṃ has a very vulgar im-
plication.]
sopānapathamutsṛjya vāyuvegasamudratam |
mahāpathena gatavānkīsaṃmānaguṇo janaiḥ ||
[apāmapatha is the anus and maddāpatha is the path of death.]24
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
(b) The Obscure Sentence..
p
dhammillasya na kasya prekṣya mikāmaṃ kuraṅgaśāvākṣyāḥ |
rājyatyapūrvabandhayutpattermānasaṃ śobhām ||
[II 1 22
['On seeing the beautifully knotted hair of the fawn-eyed one,
whose mind is not filled with love ?']
[Here the syntactical connection between her and sha
is too remote to be easily grasped.]
Example-
The above defects have been enumerated and explained with
the purpose that the poet should avoid them in his composition.
Section (2).
THE DEFECTS OF SENTENCE.
1.
I. (Faulty) Sentences are-(a) Deficient in metre; (b)
with Misplaced hiatus; and (c) Cacophonous
(of Unharmonious-Euphony).
2. That which does not fulfil the conditions of the
particular metre is 'Deficient in metre.'
ayi prekṣyāse saudhamāśritāmaviralasumanomālabhāriṇīm |
['Do you see the, woman on the house-top, adorned with a
garland of thickly-studded flowers'.]
Here the intended metre is the art in the second foot of
which there should not be a collocation of six short letters, as we
have here. Hence this is 'Deficient in metre."
3. That in which the hiatus is so misplaced as to make
the sentence awkward, unmelodious and unplea-
sant, is said to be with misplaced hiatus.'
4. E. g., there is misplacement of the hiatus when a
verb root or a noun is broken up or disjoined (by
the hiatus occurring in the middle of the word);II 2 4]
THE DEFECTS OF SENTENCE
25
but mostly in such cases alone where this disjunc-
tion or disruption is not due to the collusion of
vowel-sounds.
Example-
(a) Caused by the disjunction of the Verb-root-as in the
following line of the
metre-
etāsāṃ rājati sumanaso dāma kaṇṭhāvalambi |
['The garland of flowers hanging by the neck of these women
looks beautiful."]
[Here in the proper intonation of the line, in pronouncing the
verb we have to put the hiatus on as by the laws of
Prosody, the rafal metre must have its hiatus on the fourth
syllable of the foot; and this leads to the breaking up of the verb-
root rāja in rājati.]
(b) Breaking up of the noun-as in the following foot of the
faftoht
kuraṅgākṣīṇāṃ gaṇḍatalaphalake svedaśavisaraḥ |
[Perspiration is breaking-up over the cheeks of the fawn-eyed
women.']
By the laws of prosody, the feftoft must have its hiatus on
the sixth syllable: this syllable in the present case happens to be
and the placing of the hiatus on this leads to the breaking up of
the noun s.
A Similar disjunction of the noun is found in the following
foot of the mandākāntā- durdarśanakāśekhikapiḥ śāṇio bāhuṇḍa:-where the
hiatused fourth syllable is the of.
Inasmuch as the
specially mentions the 'verb-root' and
'noun', it follows that the breaking up of other words is not
regarded as objectionable. E. g., in the following aral
śobhā puṣyatyayamabhinavaḥ sundarīṇāṃ proṣaḥ |
[This fresh awakening of beautiful damsels enhances the
charm."]
426
[II 2 4-
disjoins only the
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[Here the hiatus on the fourth syllable
conjugational affix f and leaves the root intact.]
Similarly in the
afoit foot-
vinidra: śyāmāntevadharapuṭasītkāra vistaiḥ |
['At the close of night the spell of sleep is broken by the sound
emitted from the lips."]
[Here the hiatus is on the sixth syllable and this leaves
the noun intact, separating it only from the locative ending I
which follows.]
&
Inasmuch as the adds the qualification-' where the dis-
junction is not due to the collusion of vowel sounds-it follows
that disjunctions caused by the collusion of vowel-sounds are not
objectionable. E. g.,
kiṃcidbhāvālasamasaralaṃ prekṣitaṃ sundarīṇāma |
[The glances of beautiful women is extremely sweet by reason
of the lingering langour of emotion.']
[Here the hiatus placed on the fourth syllable a separates
the of the rest of the following noun ; but as this is due to
the collusion of the vowel st at the end of a and the vowel at
the beginning of the disruption of the noun is not
regarded as objectionable.]
5. Some people hold that the 'misplacement of the
hiatus' is nothing apart from the Deficiency in
the metre'; as 'metre' consists of hiatuses.
Metre consists only in the arrangement of hiatuses and hence
the 'misplaced hiatus' is included in the 'Deficient metre."
6. This however is not right; as the distinctive fea-
tures of the two are totally different.
The characteristics of 'metre' are entirely different from
those of hiatus', the 'metre' consisting in the arrangement of
long and short syllables, while the 'hiatus' consists in the resting
of the voice on a certain syllable.+
THE DEFECTS OF SENTENCE
27
The 'cacophonous' is that where the collusion of
words is unmelodious or unharmonious.
II. 2 81
7.
The Collusion by words is of two kinds-(1) the collusion of
vowel-sounds and (2) mere juxtaposition, the drawing together, of
words, without actual Collusion. This is objectionable when it
gives rise to an unharmonious euphony.
8. The Unharmonious Euphony' is of three kinds-
(1) Disjoined, (2) Indecorous, and (3) Discordant
(1) The Disjoined' is that wherein each word stands apart
by itself without colluding with its adjacent words-even when
such Collusion is possible.
(2) The Indecorous' is that Collusion which becomes indi-
cative of something vulgar or indecent,
1
(3) The Discordant' is that which is harsh or unpleasant to
the year.
(1) Examples of the Disjoined-
(a) medhānilena anunā etasminākānane |
[ Here it was possible for the a of anilena and the a of anunā
to become combined; and also between the 3 of 3 and of
e
af; these combinations have been omitted in consideration of
the metre.]
(b) kamale iva locame ise anuvabhāti vilāsapaddhatiḥ |
[The eyes take up the
graces of the lotus."]
[Here the collusion of
and 5 that of dr and gù and that
of and are omitted in view of the grammatical rules pre-
cluding such collusion in the case of dual case-endings.]*
-
The
T (p 374) remarks that even a single omission of the Collusion
is faulty, where it is omitted without any other reason save the wish of the speaker
or writer; but when the omission is due to grammatical rules precluding the
collusion. then it is to be regarded as 'cacophonous' only when in a single verse there
are more than one such omissions; as we have in (b)
The (b) is distinct from («) for reasons shown above.2.8
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[ 11. 2 8-
(c) arāuna āgamāmi cakāsati |
['The faces bespangled with waving locks shine beautiful."]
[Here the collusion of a with is omitted.] *
(2) Example of the 'Indecorous' Collusion-
virecakamida nṛttamācāryābhāsayojitam |
['This dancing is extremely disgusting, having been pro-
pounded by an inferior dancing master."]
(Here the word fatuæ and meaning as they do 'purgative
and pairing respectively are indecorous.]
+
cakāse panasaprāyaiḥ purī ṣaṇḍamahādrumaiḥ |
The city shone with eunuchs who resembled so many jack
fruit trees.']
[Here by a collusion of sounds we have the word gefe
'excreta ', which is 'indecorous."]
vimā śapathadānāsyāṃ padavādasasutsukam
[The collusion of words gives the word fa 'destruction',
which is inauspicious and indecent.]
(3) Example of the Discordant Collusion
mañjamudramagarbhāste gurvābhogā drumā babhruḥ |
[The trees looked beautiful with large trunks and budding
blossoms."]
[The syllables -formed by the collusion of and -and
formed by the collusion of and are very discordant and
unpleasant to the ear.]
Having described the Defects of Sentence, the proceeds to
describe those of the Meanings of Sentences-
9. (a) 'Incompatible' or 'Contradictory', (b) 'Redun-
dant', (c) ' Dubious'; (d) 'Regardless of Usage,'
P
It is not easy to see why this (c) should be cited as a third example. The
(c) does not in any way differ from (g), so it appers that (c) is printed in a wrong
place, it being only the second half of (a).IL 2, 2]
THE MEANINGS OF SENTENCE
2
V
(e) Irregular' or 'Unsymmetric'; (f) ' Opposea
to Ordinary Conceptions'; and (g) Opposed to
Scientific Conceptions', -[such sentences are
'faulty '].
10.
That in which one word contradicts that which
follows, or vice versa, is called the Incompatible'
Contradictory.'
or
Example-
{
adyāpi smarati rasālasāṃ mano me |
mugdhāyāḥ smaraścaturāṇi ceṣṭitāni ||
S
['My unctuous mind still recalls the amorous sportings of the
little guileless and unreserved girl.']
It is impossible for the sportings of an innocent little girl to be
amorous. What is 'amorous' cannot belong to the little girl',
and what pertains to the little girl' cannot be 'amorous. Thus
there is an incompatibility' between the two words tänlaufe
(amorous sportings) and (the ingenuous or candid girl).
11. When a word expresses what has already been
expressed by another word, it is 'Redundant."
Example--
cintāmohamanaṅgamaṅga tanute viprekṣitaṃ sunuvaḥ |
['O Friend, the glances of the charming-eyed girl produce in
my mind thoughts of love giving rise to anxiety and stupefaction."]
It being a well-known fact that 'anxiety' caused by love is
always in the form of 'stupefaction',-the mention of both fear and
becomes superfluous; and containing such superfluous words,
the sentence itself is said to be 'redundant.'
12. This redundancy is not a defect, when the addi-
tional word has an additional signification.
In case the word, supposed to be 'redundant', helps to signify
something over and above that signified by the former word, it
cannot he regarded as 'redundant.'1
30
KAVYALAMKARA ŠUTRA
3 [As for example] In the word
;
af: (the twang-
3
ing of the bowstring of the bow) the addition of
the word 'a', 'bow' [even though the word T
itself means the bowstring] serves to afford the
idea of the string being strung on tightly to the
bow,
If the word g: were omitted, there would be nothing to show
that the sound proceeded from the string as strung on to the bow.
We find the use of such words common, e. g.
dhanurjyākiṇacidana doṣṇā viskuritaṃ tava |
14. Similarly in the case of the words- karṇāvataṃsa, śravaṇakuṇḍala,
śiraḥśekhara and the like, the mention of the words karṇa
and the rest denotes proximity.
1
The word aad by itself signifies 'ornament of the ear':
similarly F means the 'ear-ring', and at the head-ornament':
and thus the idea of 'ear and 'head' is already present in the
denotation of the word and at; but in the absence of the
words '' and 'A', there would be nothing to denote the
fact that what is meant is the ornament' as worn in the ear or on
the head.
II 2 13
Examples
>
dolāvilāseṣu vilāsinīnāṃ karṇāvartamāḥ kalayanti kampam |
[During the joyous swingings of sportive girls, the ear-orna-
ments in the ear remain quivering.")
līlācalacchravaṇakuṇḍalamāpasanti |
[They fall upon the gracefully-shaking earrings."]
āyapurbhuimukharaśiraḥśekharaśālinā |
[There came people wearing crest-ornaments humming with
bees."
1
:
ļLORE
154
THE MEAN NOS OF SENTENCE
3
ease of the word are the word
serves
to signify purity or unmixed character (of the
pears in the necklace).
śrīvāda
itsell denotes the necklace containing pearls; but
without the addition of the word there would be nothing to
show that the necklace contained only pearls, and no other gems.
Example-
prāṇeśvarapariṣvavitramapratipattibhiḥ |
muktāhāroga hasatā hasatīna starāma ||
The breasts adorned with the pearl-necklace appear as if
they were smiling at the joyous experience of the charms of the
lover's embrace."]
16. In the word ger flower-garland', the word
'flower' serves to denote the excellence of the
flowers contained in the garland.
I means 'the garland of excellent flowers."
The word
Example-
prāyaśaḥ puṣpamāleva kanyā mā katra lobhavet |
[Whom would not the girl, resembling as she does the
garland of excellent flowers, inspire with a longing to possess
her?']
It may be urged that the word are does not necessarily signify
the flower; inasmuch as the word is used in connection with gems
also, such expressions as gjej, uzgiel and the like being very
common. But the fact is that in all such expressions the word
is used only figuratively; as in reality the word met by itself,
without any appendage, is found to denote only the 'garland of
flowers,
17. In after the addition of the word serves to
denote Similarity to the f (grown-up elephant)
denoting the Elephant Cub, the addition of the
wordt 'Elephant." would appear to be superfluous. But this
The word
}KAVYALAMKara Šutra
[11 2 18
addition serves to express the idea that the 'Cub' resembles in
strength, &c., the aft or grownup elephant.
Example-
32
tyaja karikalabha tvaṃ prītibandhaṃ kariṣyāḥ |
I'O powerful young elephant cub, renounce the love-
entanglings of the mighty she-elephant.']
18. Words are also added for the purpose of the add-
ing of qualifications.
jagāda madhurāṃ vīcaṃ viśākṣaraśālinīm |
['He spoke sweet words containing clear-sounding letters'] —
the 'word'e itself contains the idea of the word' (as it is only
words that are spoken); and yet the word ar word' is added
for the purpose of the addition of the qualifying epithets # and
viśākṣaraśālinīma.
19. All these exceptions, however, apply only to such
words and expressions as are already in accepted
usage.
And their justification cannot be extended to newly coined
words and expressions; e. g., the Analogy of
extended to javanakāñcī; nor that of karikalabha to uṣṭrakalabha
cannot be
On this point we have the following verse-
'In such words as f and the like the use of the words
and the rest serve the purpose of denoting proximity and such
other conceptions; but this justification can apply only to such
words and expressions as are already in accepted usage.'*
20. The 'Dubious' is that which creates doubt in the
mind.
* This verse occurs as kārikā 58 of chapter vll of the kāvyaprakāśa. This
would show that the Karikas of the IT are not by the author of the
R but by an older writer. As one of these Karikas is found here quoted
by who is older than 42. Thus this quotation here lends support to the
idea that the Karikas of the IT are by Bharata.II 2.22]
THE MEANINGS OF SENTENCE
33
That sentence, in which, either through the mention of com-
mon properties or through the non-mention of distinctive charac-
ters-doubts arise, is called the 'Dubious'. As for example in the
line-
sa mahātmābhāgyavaśānmahāpadamupāgataḥ | It is doubtful whether it means
that the high-minded person 'fell into trouble' MMA:,
'through ill-luck,', or that he reached a high position,"
mahāpadaṃ upāgataḥ, through good luck' bhāgyavaśāt ; such doubts are
especially liable to arise when, for the comprehension of the real
meaning, we have no such aids as those of context and the like.
f
21. The 'regardless of usage' is that sentence, the sig-
nification attached to which is purely imaginary
or illusory.
Examples of this are rare.
22. The 'unsymmetric' is that in which the idea ex-
pressed is not in the proper order.
There is always a definite order and relationship in the
'subjects' and 'predicates' of sentences; the sentence in which
this order is not observed is called 'unsymmetric.' As for example,
in the line-
kīrtipratāpa bhavataḥ sūryācandramasoḥ samau |
Thy fame and glory are like the sun and the moon'
the 'fame is intended to resemble the
the 'sun'; and with this view the 'moon'
the 'sun' in the compound.
'moon' and the glory'
should have preceded
The
(order or symmetry) may also be regarded as consist-
ing in the prior mention of the more important factors; and the
absence of this would, in that case, constitute the 'unsymmetric.
As for example, in the line-
turaṅgamatha mātaṅgaṃ prayacchāmai mālasam |
+
['Give him a horse or a gigantic elephant rolling in intoxica
tion ]-[the natural 'order' should have been give him a
gigantic elephant, or (if not that, then,) a horse].
534
23
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[II 2 23-
That is opposed to ordinary conceptions which
expresses ideas contrary to (incompatible with)
place, time and nature.
✔
1
It is through the incompatibility of the idea expressed by the
sentence that the latter is regarded as 'incompatible."
Example of 'incompatibility with place'-
'In the country of the wife there is the well-known town of
, the lands in the vicinity whereof are teeming with walnut and
coco-nut trees."
agar is not situated in the
district; nor does the walnut
or the coco-nut grow in lands adjacent to qya)
Example of 'incompatibility with time-
'During the Spring, the forest shone with a flowers."
(The blooms during the rains, and not during Spring.)
Example of 'incompatibility with nature'
"The beauty of the va (Autumn) is floating, as it were, in the
blossoms of the plant among which the intoxicated bees are
humming.
appear in burches, and not in the
The flowers of the
form of blossoms.'
Again in the verse-
"The flower-bud was pressed by the bee in such a manner,
that it rained honey enough to fill a hole as large as the hoof or
the cow.'
There is no flower-bud in existence which can ever produce
such a large quantity of honey.
$
24. That is Opposed to Scientific Conceptions' which
expresses such ideas as are incompatible with
the established principles of Arts and Sciences.
Example of ideas opposed to the principles of Art :-
*O friend, this is a sig letter having its corner not turned
down,'II 2 24]
THE MEANINGS OF SENTENCE
35
of telters,
According to the laws of letter-writing, in all
the corners have to be turned down; while the above line
represents it as not having the corner turned down. Similarly
with the contradiction of the laws of other Arts.
Examples of the Contradiction of the principles of other
Sciences-
'For Kings, the conquest of the world follows from the fulfil-
ment of their sexual desires."
The law of all scriptures is that the successful conquest of the
world is possible only if the King is virtuous and performs sacrifices:
it is this law of Righteousness that the line contradicts.
Again-
'Enemies are conquered by means of pride.-what then is the
need of policy?'
It is a law of the science of Politics that it is by policy that
enemies are conquered; and the line is a direct contradiction of this,
Again-
'I remember the face languid through embraces, the upper lip
sanctified with the mark of teeth."
This contradicts the law of the science of Erotics, whereby
kissing marks may appear anywhere in the body except in the
upper lip, the inside of the mouth and the eyes.
Lastly
'Deliverance proceeds, not from true knowledge, but from
devotion to God.'
This is contrary to the Science of Deliverance whereby it is to
be gained by knowledge alone.*
The defects described above have to be known for the purpose
of avoiding them. As for the other subtle defects of words or word-
meanings, we shall describe them in course of our explanation of
the 'Qualities': and the Defects of Similarity also will be treated of
on the Section on 'Simile.'
* The line, however, is quite in keeping with the principles of the IMG
propounded by Midsta36
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[ III, 1-1-
CHAPTER III
QUALITIES.
Section (1).
(a) DIFFERENGE BETWEEN 'Quality' and 'ORNAMENT' OR FIGURE.
(b) VERBAL QUALITIES (OF STYLE).
'Defect' principally consists in the absence of ‘Qualities';
hence the proceeds to describe the Qualities of Style. In this
connection it has to be noted that 'Florridity,' 'Lucidity' &c., have
been called 'Qualities' ard 'Alliteration, "Simile and the rest are
called 'Ornaments or Figures of Speech'; and it is necessary at the
outset to explain the basis of this differentiation of Qualities and
Ornaments.
1. Qualities' are those characteristics that create or
constitute the charm of poetry.
Those characters of Words and Ideas that constitute the
Charm of Poetry are called 'Qualities': such are the characters of
Florridity,' 'Lucidity' and the like. This cannot be said of
Alliteration,' 'Simile and the rest; as by themselves alone, these
do not bring about charm in poetry; as is done by 'Florridity'
and the rest.
2. The Ornaments on the other hand are such
characters as serve to enhance the charm
(already produced by the Qualities).
Such are 'Alliteration'' Simile' and other Figures of Speech.
On this point we have the following verses-
Dhambal
'Just as a young woman endowed with beauty looks chaiming
and the wearing of ornaments enhances this natural charm,-so in
the case of Poetry also, if it is endowed with pure qualities. it
acquires a peculiar charm; and the presence of the Ornaments or
Figures of Speech serves to enhance that charm."
'On the other hand, if the woman happens to be devoid of
youth (and beauty) the addition of ornaments, even though[5]
VERBAL QUALITIES
37
llent in themselves, only serves to accentuate the ugliness so
he case of Poetry also, if the words are devoid of the qualities
tyle, the presence of Figures of Speech becomes a source of
agance only.
3. The former (i.e the Qualities) are permanent.
The Qualities form permanent features in Poetry: as without
there is no charm (and without charm there is no Poetry ).
[The Figures of Speech on the other hand are evanescent
1g mere accidental embellishments ]
Having explained the difference between Qualities and
aments, the sūtra proceeds to describe the Verbal Qualities.'
4 The Qualities of Style are - (a) Florridity (ojas),
(b) Plainness or Simplicity (prasāda), (c) Coalescene
(of Words) (śleṣa), (d) Uniformity (of Diction) (samatā)
(e) Symmetry ( samādhi), (f) Sweetness (mādhurya),
(g) Softness (saumārya ), (h) Raciness ( udāratā ) (i) Ex-
plicitness or Lucidity (arthavyakti), (j) Brilliancy ( kānti).
By 'Style' is meant the composition of words.
5. (a) Florridity
consists in ornateness (high-
sounding words and sentences).
Example-
vilulitamakarandā mañjarīnartayanti |
[ They are shaking the blossoms bespattered with pollen.]
This would lose its 'florridity if we read it as
villulitamadhudhārā mañjarīlolayanti
NorE---Tue kāvya prakāśa enumerates the bigh.ounding letters as followg--
‘kka, kkha, kra, stra, rka, rkha, ggū, gh, grū, gh, rga, rpū. c, cch, c, hū, j,
ñ, jhū, īṃ, īṃ, rjū, ī, hu, hu, hu druḍū, ḍū, ḍū, ṭrū, ī, ī, īṃ, rṭū tū,
dhū, dhū, dū, d, d, brū, ī, dhūṃ, ī, lū~, ppū, ephū, prū, phrū, blū, bbhū, brū,
ī, rph, rnū rbhū, d, , , , , , ṣū.
Long Compounds
Bonbastic style in general.' – kārikā VIIL. 75.
Thus we find that while the line cited in example contains the letters and f
e are absent in the amended form.A
38
KAVYALAMKĀRA SUTRA
6. (b)
Simplicity' consists in plainness.
It might be objected that 'Simplicity' is only absence of
florridity; and as such being the negation of a 'Quality', it should
be regarded as a 'Defect'; why then, should it be mentioned among
Qualities"?
*
In answer to this we have the next .
[III 6-
7. 'Simplicity' is a Quality, when appearing along
with Florridity';
4
8. and not by itself alone.
When it appears alone by itself, it becomes a Defect.
Question How can there be a combination of two such
contradictory characters as Florridity and Simplicity?
Answer.
9. That there is such combination is a fact of common
experience.
Such a combination is often met with; and it resembles the
combination of various tunes of diverse kinds.
On this point we have the following verse-man
'Just as in the case of all pathetic exhibitions (dramatic
performances) there appears mixture of pain and pleasure, as we
find in ordinary experience,--so in the same manner, we find in
experience the mixture of Florridity and Simplicity."
10. [In 30.ne cases of such combination] there is
equality between the two, and in others]
superiority (of one over the other).
We find the two equal in the lines-
4
atha ca viṣayavyāvṛtātmā yathāvidhi manave ~~ [Simplicity.]
nṛpatikakudaṃ dattvā yūne sitānapavāra | [Florridity.]
The old king having his mind turned away from the objects
of enjoyment, he duly made over to his young son the white
umbrella.'
t
3
€
#5VERBAL QUALITIES
III 1 1 1
In some cases we have Florridity supervening over Simplicity;
6. g.
vrajati gaganaṃ bhallātakyāḥ phalena sahopamānda |
"The sky bears resemblance to the fruit of the year.
[Here we have Florridity down to the word "gid, Simplicity
appearing only in the last two words.]
In some cases again Simplicity supervenes over Florridity; e.g.
kusumaśayanaṃ na pratyagraṃ na candramarīcayo
ma va malayajaṃ sarvāṅgīṇaṃ na vā maṇiyaṣṭayaḥ |
39
'Neither the bedding of fresh flowers, nor the rays of the
moon, nor sandal-wood painting over the body, nor jewelled sticks
&c., &c."
[Here we have only the letters and (in
the whole word af and the letter & (in
the 'Florrid': the rest is all 'simple'.]
NOTE. The
RT defines 'Simplicity' thus-
Lucidity or Simplicity is that Quality by virtue of which the whole idea
intended to be expressed is grasped at the first hearing of the words. (VIII-76).'
11. (c) 'Coalescence' consists of smoothness.
yu), z (în áƒ¤,)
:) savouring of
By 'smoothness' is meant that quality whereby a number of
words coalescing sound as one word. As for example, in the line-
antyuttarasyāṃ diśi devatātmā himālayo nāma nagādhirājaḥ |
"Towards the north, there lies the King of Mountains, ISO
the abode of the gods",
Such coalescence' is not found in the line-
(1)
or in- ( 2 )
or in-(3) THÁNGHINATANG,
[et appears as one word, though consisting of the two
words asti and uttarasyāṃ.
sūtraṃ brāhmamuraḥsthale.
amarīvalgugītayaḥ.[III
Though we would have 'coalescence' if they were amended
respectively as follows-
40
(1)
( 2 )
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
brāhmaṃ satramuraḥsthal̤e, sūtramuraḥsthal̤e, appearing as one word.
bhramarīmañjugītayaḥ and (3) taḍijaṭilamākāśama.
NOTE The (pp. 535-36) does not accept 'Coalescence' as an inde-
pendent quality; it holds it to be only a particular form of Florridity.'-(fe
on kārikā 72) .
12. (d)
verse---
(
2
Uniformity' consists in the non-difference or
homogenity of diction.
That is to say, when the style of diction employed in the
beginning of a verse, or of a complete poetical work, is continued
to the end, we have what is called 'Uniformity'.
As an example we have the line quoted above-atyuttarasthāma
As an instance of absence of uniformity we have the following
prasīda caṇḍi svaja manpumaasā janastavārya purataḥ kṛtāñjaliḥ |
kimatkamtiīvarastanadvayaṃ tvayā luptavilāsamāsyate ||
'Be appeased, O angry one! give up your anger; here I am
(beseeching your pardon) with joined hands; why are you sitting
with heaving breasts and dejected spirits ?'
[Here in the first half we have the simplest diction, entirely
free from compounds; while the second half abounds in compounds.]
13. (e) 'Symmetry' consists in the orderly sequence of
'ascent' and 'descent.'
A line or verse is said to have the quality of 'Symmetry' when
it is found to be so worded that the heightening effect of the
'forcible' style is toned down by a judicious sprinkling of words of
the 'softer' kind; or when the softening effect of the less vigorous
style is heightened by the introduction of words of the 'forcible
kind.III 1 16]
VERBAL QUALITIES
As an example of the former we have
nirānandaḥ kaunde madhuni paribhuktojjhitarase |
41
[Where the 'high' tone of f; and is 'softened'
ay kaunde and madhuni.]
As an example of the latter kind we have the line-
marā' śīlabhraṣṭā vyasana iva majjanti taravaḥ |
[Where the 'softening' effect of ; and at: is 'heightened' by
she words śīlabhraṣṭāḥ and yajanti.]
:
According to some writers 'symmetry' is that quality by virtue
of which there is a gradual decline from the 'vigorous' to the 'feeble'
style, or a gradual rise from the 'feeble' to the 'vigorous.' As an
example of this we have the line.-
niveśa: svaḥsiyostuhinagirivīthīpa jayati |
[Where we have a gradual decline from the forcible and
vigorous svaḥsindhoḥ to the 'soft' in jayati.]
+
14. [Some writers have held that] this Symmetry'
is not a separate
a separate quality' by itself, as the
'ascent' and 'descent' (of the previous) are
the same as Florridity' and 'Simplicity' res-
pectively.
15. This is not right; because of the two (Florridity and
Simplicity) being interwoven.
It is not right to assert that 'ascent' consists in 'Florridity' and
'descent' in 'Simplicity'; because 'Florridity' and 'Simplicity' are
interwoven together, and exist like the (two) currents of a single
river (while'ascent' and 'descent' can never co-exist).
16. And also because it is not absolutely and univer-
sally true [that in Florridity' there is ascent,'
7
d
or in 'Simplicity,"descent']42
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
III
4
17
17.
If however, it be held that 'ascent' and 'descent'
occur in the heightened or acute stages of
Florridity and Simplicity',-we accept this
view.
We do not object to the view that in the 'Florrid' or the
'Simple' style, when they appear in their acute forms, there are
ascent' and 'descent' respectively.
18. Because in this case 'ascent' and 'decent' become
dependent upon other peculiarities (and not
entirely upon Florridity and Simplicity).
And it is this other peculiarity' that constitutes an entirely
different 'quality' (which we have called 'Symmetry').
19. It is on the basis of this ascent and descent' that
it is regarded as a distinct quality named
'Symmetry'.
Thus the definition propounded above in Sätra 13 has to be
regarded as figurative; [the Quality is dependent upon 'ascent and
descent' and does not exactly consist in them.]
20. The (13) may be regarded as propound-
ing a distinct definition of 'Symmetry', only for the
purpose of indicating the fact that there should be
orderly sequence (in the ascent and descent).
That the 'ascent' and 'descent do not refer to the way or
tone in which a certain linc is read, we shall show below under
sūtra 28.
21.
Sweetnes's lies in the distinctness of words.
When in a piece of composition the words are quite distinct
from one another, it is said to abound in the quality of 'Sweetness'.
That is to say, 'Sweetness' consists in the absence of long com-
pounds. Examples of this have already been cited above (for
instance under 1-11-13 – 'grāmesminpathikāya pāntha &c.'), As an example
of the absence of this quality we haveIII 1 23)
VERBAL QUAL TIES
BOGDANANQUIENS
dhvanicakitavarāhavyākulā vindhyapādāḥ |
'The outskirts of the Vindhya range teem with boars frighten-
ed by the sound of the horn-trumpets blown by the marching
hosts of śabara'
NOTES -The PYYARI (VIII, 74) enumerates the following letters &c as
favouring the quality of Sweetness-
1
$, sa. ḍaca, ñcha, aॅ, njha, ghaṭa, ṇṭha, ṇḍa, paढ़,nta, ntha, n ndha- mrupa,
FF, FI, FH,—, , (both short),--no compounds, or, at best, short compounds
of not more than four words.-and the softer conjunct letters proceeding from the
combination of two words, for instance, when the word tufaṁ is followed
by , the resultant conjunction gives rise to the soft conjunct letter. The
commentators add that as regards the restriction of the short , and I, it does
not follow from this that Sweetness would be spoilt by a single long or, it is
only when such long and I, are repeated that they interfere with the quality
of Sweetness
22.
NOTE. According to the
being only the negation of the 'defect of 'Haishness.'
6
43
"Softness' consists in the non-harshness of
composition.
The example is as cited above açàíè¶-¶fùæi, &c., As an
example of the absence of this 'Softness' we have-
nidāna mileṃ priyajana
vyavalitiḥ |
sudhāseka ṭoṣauphalamapi virudhdaṃ mama hṛdi |
-
Softness' is not an independent 'quality'
23. 'Raciness' lies in piquancy of style.
It is that quality by virtue of which, in regard to a piece of
composition, people speak of the words as if 'dancing': that is to
say, where the whole piece is enlivened by the peculiar swing of
the words taken together.
Example-
svacaraṇa viniviṣṭairnṛpuranartakīnāṃ
jhaṭiti raṇitamāsīttatra citraṃ kartuṃ ca |
The tingling of the anklets attached to the ankles of the
dancing girls gives rise to a variegated and sweet sound'.
}
I
t
4[IIL 24
NOTE. The
regards this as a form of 'Florridity'. But in Raciness
it is not neceesary that there should be any particular set of letters, as those
enumerated by the H2H/T in connection with Floridity. All that is necessary
here is a peculiar arrangement of the words (irrespective of the lettersounds),
whereby the whole line acquires a 'swing' that gives the name to the quality.
44
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
24. 'Explicitness' is that quality by which the
meaning is easily comprehended.
Examples cited above. Examples of Inexplicitness are numerous
and can be easily collected.
NOTE -The
regards this explicitness as only a form of 'Simplicity'
25. Brilliancy is that richness or ornateness of
style [in the absence of which a piece of composition is
called an 'imitation of the gun).
Example--
kuraṅgīnevālīstabakitavanālī parisara::
The outskirts of the forest are made, by means of the eyes of
the deer, to appear as adorned with so many bunches of flowers.'
Examples of the opposite kind are many and easily found.
holds that this is nothing more or less than the absence
NOTE.-The 54
of the defect of 'Vulgarity."
With regard to the Qualities described above, we have the
following verse:
"The poets give the name of Florridity to the ornate style:
words abounding in this quality are very pleasant to the ear."
'When Florridity is accompanied by plainness, it is called
Simplicity, without this quality there is no delectation in a poetical
work.'
Coalescence is that excellent quality by which more words than
one coalescing, appear as but one word, the letter-conjunctions
being (so smooth and natural) as not to be noticed.'III 1 28]
VERBAL QUALIT ES
45
'Uniformity is the quality consisting in the using of the same
style of diction in each foot or verse; this is difficult of composition
and can be distinguished with difficulty."
'That wherein the hiatuses ascend in a uniform manner is
called the quality of Symmetry; by this quality Speech is rendered
pure.
'When in a piece of composition each word appears clear and
distinct, we have the quality of Sweetness; endowed with this, the
composition becomes a veritable stream of honey."
'Just as lines are variously cut and arranged by expert painters,
in the same manner is speech (words) arranged by intelligent
writers, in accordance with various qualities."
'Softness consists in the absence of harsh letters; speech devoid
of this quality becomes harsh and unpleasant to the ear."
'Piquancy of words they call Raciness; in the absence of this,
composition remains devoid of variegation (and beauty)."
'When the idea of the thing expressed comes before the
apprehension of the words themselves, the meaning being readily
comprehended--we have the quality of Explicitness.'
'People learned in the qualities have declared Brilliancy to
consist in oinateness or richness; devoid of this, the work of the poet
becomes an imitation of the g
26. The existence of these qualities cannot be
denied; because they are actually cognised as existing.
It may be objected that though the qualities may be known as
entities by people learned in them, it is quite possible that people
may be mistaken about them. In answer to this we have the next
Siztra.
27. There is no mistake in the qualities because
of unflinching character [of the use made of them].
28. These qualities are not mere peculiarities of
the way of reading (recitation); because they are not
found present in all cases (of recitation).7
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[Ill 2 1-
If these qual tres consisted only in the peculiarities of recita-
tion, they would be found equally in all pieces of composition,
irrespective of any other peculiarities (of lettersounds &c.). As a
matter of fact however, these are not found everywhere; the presence
or absence of particular qualities being found to be dependent upon
the presence or absence of certain well-defined characteristics
(described above).
46
Section (2).
IDEAL QUALITIES.
The proceeds to describe the Ideal Qualities or Qualities of
Meaning:
1. Those described above [Florridity, &c.] are the
Ideal Qualities also.
The following Sutras proceed to point out the differences in
the two sets of qualities (Verbal and Ideal), as due to the fact that
the word is the denoter and the idea the denoted.
2. Florridity (Ideal) consists in the boldness or
sententiousness of conception.
This Ideal Florridity is of five kinds:-(1) Where a whole
sentence is used to express what is expressible by a single word;
(2) where a single word is used to express what is expressible by a
sentence; (3) where there is brevity (one sentence serving the
purpose of many sentences): (4) where there is diffuseness (many
sentences being used to express what could be expressed by a
single sentence): and (5) where qualifications are added with a
purpose.
Example of (})-nayamasamutthaṃ jyotiratreriva (the light born of the eye
of f) for the single word (Moon); and so on. What is meant
by a 'sentence' here is only a collection of a number of words
(and not necessarily one that expresses a complete idea, contain-
ing a finite verb and such other syntactical accessories).47
IDIAL QUALITIES
III 2 2 1
In the following verse also we find that what could have been
expressed by the single expression 'the plums are dry' is
expressed by a whole verse-
'In the beginning it becomes slightly pale; after that it becomes
whitish; then through excessive ripeness its body becomes tainted
with the quality of redness; and finally when the process of drying
sets in, it becomes contracted in its circumference; and becoming
devoid of its exuberance, it becomes insipid.'
Nor would it be right to carry this process to an undue excess:
because we have the definition of 'quality' as that which adds
charm to poetry and such dilatory style adds this charm, only
within certain limits.
(2) As an example of expressing by means of a word what is
expressible by a sentence, we have the word 'winks' mentioned
with reference to a lady, with a view to declare that "She is human,
and not divine' [divine beings being known to have no winking of
the eyes).
(3) Diffuseness of Sentences-many sentences being used
where a single one would have served the purpose--we have in the
following
"The rotation of happiness and unhappiness proceeds variously.
Either Happiness or Unhappiness comes about: and then both
cease entirely again after this there follows happiness and
unhappiness and after this there is neither happiness
unhappiness.'
[The whole of this expresses the single idea that there is rota-
tion in the appearance of Happiness and Unhappiness.]
(4) Brevity (a single sentence serving for many) we have in
the following-
'Having taken leave of my; seeing fa and declaring to
him the success of their mission, and being dismissed by him, they
flew away into the skies,'[III 2 2
[Here we have a single sentence in place of the following
sentences they took leave of --they saw ta-they
declared to him the success of their mission, they were dismissed
by a-they flew away to the skies."]
48
(5) The insertion of qualifications with a purpose, we have in
the line-
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
"This young son of Candragupta, effulgent as the moon, has,
by good luck, become the supporter of the learned.' Here the quali-
fication supporter of the learned' has been added for the definite
purpose of indicating the fact that the prince had Subandhu for his
counsellor.
Similarly in the line-
'On the loosening of the hair of the lady with beautiful hatr
the qualification with beatiful hair-has been added with a
4
purpose.
3. 'Simplicity' consists in the clearness of meaning.
By Clearness' is meant the mention of that alone which is
absolutely necessary. Example-
savarṇā kanyakā rūpayauvanārambhaśālinī |
www
'A girl of the same caste, and endowed with beauty and budd-
ing youth.'
As an example of non-simplicity, we have-
upāstāṃ isto me vimalamaṇikājīpadamidacha |
'May my
hand approach the girdle-zone of beautiful gems.
Here what is necessary is the mention of the 'girdle-zone' only:
and the addition of the epithet t is absolutely superfluous,
4.
'Coalescence' consists in the commingling (of many
ideas).
+
By commingling' is meant the mention of more than one
action partaking of cunning not perceived (by the person concer-
ned), and indicative of reasons (for the commingling of the acts and
the non-perception of the cunning).
M-III. 2.5]
IDEAL QUALITIES
Example:-
'The lover saw two of his most beloved girls seated upon the
same seat; coming up from behind, he, under the pretence of
sportive dalliance, closed with his hands the eyes of one of them, and
then twisting his neck a little, the cunning man kissed the other
whose heart was overflowing with love and whose checks were
blooming with suppressed smiles."
49
Ņ
[Here we have a number of actions, coming from behind, &c.
partaking of cunning on the part of the lover; and the cunning is
not perceived by one of the ladies, by reason of her eyes being
closed &c.]
We find this quality abounding in the works of and
other poets of that kind.
4
5. Uniformity' consists in the non-relinquishment of
proper sequence or contiguity.
In some cases this contiguity is relinquished; e. g. in the follow-
ing verse,
The kunda plants have shed their flowers; trees have become
slow in bringing out their blossoms; sweet breezes, shaking the
patience of separated lovers, are proceeding from the mountains,
the rays of the sun are removing the effects of cold; and yet they
do not attain that sharpness which brings about perspiration.'
This verse is intended to be a description of the junction-point
of the two seasons of Spring and Summer; and yet in the second line
we have the mention of the blowing of the H bieeze, which is a
distinctive feature of the Spring only; and cannot pertain to the
point were Spring is lapsing into Summer.
In view of this break in the contiguity of ideas, the second line
should be read as-
manasi ca giraṃ bantī kirānta na kokilāḥ |
"The koil binds think in their minds of their sweet voice, and
do not sing out."
7JU
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[H 2 6
6
We may also regard the 'non relinquishment
sequence or contiguity to consist in the ease
comprehension.
That is to say, that which is easy of comprehension may k
called 'uniform. e. g. the line-sregarei fast etc.
t
'The is in the north.'
Examples to the contrary are easily found.
7. (Orderly Sequence) consists in the characte
by which the meaning is easily grasped.
as it leads to
This quality is called
tion of mind, which helps us to grasp the real meaning,
am or concentra
8. The Meaning is of two kinds-that which is abso-
lutely original, and that which is borrowed from
others.
That meaning, the grasping of which constitutes af is of
two kinds. The 'original' one is that which has its source in the
collected mind (of the poet and his audience) solely; the other kind
is that which has its source in the work of other poets,
As examples we have the following-
(a) 'O moon, quickly move away from my wine-cup, before
thou art bitten by my teeth; or else bearing the marks of my teeth
thou wilt not go to the sky, for fear of oft (your wife).'
[This is absolutely original.]
(b) 'Do not thou fear, O Moon: (the Eclipser) is not
present in my wine: as for it (thy wife) she is in the sky,why
then shouldst thou be afraid of her? As a rule, whenever young
men meet clever women for the first time, their minds are fickle;
what wonder then that thou art behaving thus ?'
The main ideas of this have clearly been borrowed from the
preceding verse.
9. The Meaning again is explicit and subtle.
The explicit meaning has already been described and exempli-
ied; the proceeds to describe the Subtle meaning--III. 2.13]
IDEAL QUALITIES
51
10. The Subtle meaning is of two kinds that which
is comprehended by a little thought, and that
which can be comprehended only by deep
thought.
As an example of the former kind we have-
The pair of lovers lie in the pleasure-house-having the
brightness of their teeth enhanced by mutual contact, and the pupils
of the eyes mingling together; and their eyes are indicative of a
mixture of anger, tears and fear.'
An example of the second kind-
'She cast her glances on me; while her thighs were trembling
under strong emotion, her breasts pointed towards me; and she
fondled her necklace with her right hand.'
The lady invites embrace
11. 'Sweetness' consists in the impressiveness of the
conception.
Where what is said is exceptionally impressive we have the
quality of sweetness."
Example:-
'Nectar is sweet, without doubt: honey also is not otherwise;
sweet also is the juicy fruit of the mango; yet, for once, it has to
be declared without partiality, by the man efficient in discriminating
flavour, if there is anythig more delectable than the lips of the
beloved!'
12. Softness' is freedom from harshness or disagree-
ableness.
E. g.. When we speak of the dead person as 'one whose sole
remnant is his good name'; or of the solitary person as 'having god
alone for his campanion'; or when instead of saying 'go' we
say 'accomplish your business' aray.
13. 'Delicacy' () is absence of vulgarity.52
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[III 2 3-
P
Example
You are full of beauty,--he also is not devoid of charm; both
of you are well-versed in the arts: the pair of you is quite in keeping
with each of you; if what remains to be done under the circumstan-
ces, does come about, all victory and success then to the presence
of good qualities!'
[The meeting of the lovers is hinted at very delicately).
As an example of the Vulgar we have-
While this person is sleeping here, I am also lying down,
saying this when I touched her girdle-zone, she removed my
hands."
(This is extremely vulgar.
When the characteristic features of things are
made manifest, it is 'Explicitness.'
Example
'In the water of the lake, the lily is blooming; on the back of
its leaves resembling a piece of conchshell, it bears the mark of red
lines; and its outer leaves are reddish-tawny like the firdan,'
6
And again-
The fading (long-blooming) lotus passes through painful
experiences during the daily process of drooping (in the evening):
At the beginning of the process, the heavy filaments have their
ends thrown about on all sides; then the inner petals lying all apart
come together; after this, all that the outer petals can do is to
become only slightly curved.'
15.
Brilliancy' is that by which the Emotions [of the
Erotic &c.] are made conspicuously prominent."
Example--
*In the evening, when the lover had fallen down upon her feet
(in repentance) she had, with an oath, rejected him; upon this
when he, in a dejected mood, proceeded to move away, as soon as heIII 2 151
IDEAL QUALITIES
53
had moved two or three steps she ian forward, holding with her
hands her loosened clothes, and caught him up in her arms and fell
upon his feet,-really wonderful is the way of love!'
Here we have the Erotic.] Similarly with the other emotions.
In connection with this subject we have the following verses:
'It is only when all the qualities are fully manifest that poetry
is said to be fully ripe or developed; and then alone is this ipening
of poetry likened to the ripening of the mango.'
'That poetry, on the other hand, where we have only the
grammatically correct forms of nouns and verbs, and where the
subject matter is obscure and the qualities not happily mixed-
such poetry is disliked by the people, resembling as it does, the
ripened brinjal fruit (which on ripening is not fit for use).'
That piece of composition, the meaning whereof is entirely
devoid of all qualities, is absolutely worthless; such sentences for
instance, as ten pomegranates and the like; such pieces do not
deserve the slightest consideration.'
+
NOTE-The K does not admit of the division of qualues into Verbal
and Ideal; the ideal 'qualities' being entirely rejected 'Floridity' ([deal) according
to the SPYYNT is not a quality, being nothing more than a fanciful blending of
ideas; the Floridity that consists in the adding of qualifications for a purpose is no-
thing more or less than the negation of such defects as incompleteness of meaning.
Similarly Simplicity' is only the negation of the defect of 'Redundant word';
'Sweetness' consists in the negation of the defect of monotony': 'Sofiness' the
negation of Indecency", and "Delicacy' the negation of 'Vulgarity': the Ex-
plicitness of 'Meaning' is only another name for the figure al or 'Natural
Description'; 'Brilliancy' is only one form of subordinate suggestion; 'Coalescence'
consists in a mere fanciful giouping of ideas, indicative of the poet's powers of
imagisation, and lending grace to the sentiments delineated; 'Uniformity' is negation
of the fault, of relinquishing the subject: and HYÏFT is not a quality; it has been
regarded as consisting in the comprehensibility of the original meaning: this hap-
pens, as a matter of fact, in all compositions, there can be no composition of which
the meaning is not comprebended.
(kāvyaprakāśa pages 537-413.54
KavyalamKARA ŠŪTRA
CHAPTER IV.
FIGURES OF SPEECH.
Section (1).
VERBAL FIGURES.
[IV] F
It has been explained above that the charm of poetry is due to
the Qualities and that charm is enhanced by the Ornaments or
Figures of Speech. Thus then, having described the Qualities, the
proceeds to describe the Figures of Speech. Of these again
the two Verbal Figures, (Chime or Reverberation) and
(Alliteration),-are dealt with first-
1. When the same word is repeated in its different
significations, or when the same letter is repeat-
ed, in well-defined places, we have Chime.
When one or more words are repeated with different signifi-
cations, and similarly when one or more letters are repeated, in
the same places,--it is Chime:-that to say, when either the same
or similar words.-either in part or in entirety--are repeated in more
than one foot of the verse, and in the same part of the feet. We
meet with instances of Chime wherein we have the repetitions in
the same foot; and in these cases the 'restriction of place' spoken
of in the above definition is taken as in reference to other verses;
the sense being that the repetitions are (for instance) in that place
which would be the first place in another veise.
The places' spoken of above are next described--
2. The places are-the entire foot, the beginning.
the middle, and the end of the foot; and the
beginning, the middle, and the end of more than
one foot.
Example of the 'chiming' of the entire foot-s
asajjanavaco yasya kālakāmadhugāītam |
tasya na svādviṣataroḥ kalikāmadhu garhitā ||-IV. 1 2]
VERBAL FIGURES
55
That person who listens (treats) with respect to the words of
the wicked, productive as they are of ill-feeling (afdamga).-
for such a person even the honey from the blossoms of the poison-
ous tree would not be something to be disregarded.
[Here the entire foot fear is iepeated, and the
meaning is different in the two cases. ]
[This repetition of the second in the fourth foot has been called
saṃdaṭaka ]
?
Example of 'Chiming' at the beginning of the feet--
hanta hantararātīnāṃ vīravīracitā tava |
kāmaṃ kāmandakī nītirasyā ramyā divāniśam ||
*O brave destroyer of enemies your intelligence is ever
respected and verily the science of polity propounded by turgan
is being tasted (studied) day and night by this intellect of yours."
'Chiming at the end of the feet:--
{
vasuparāsu pasasumivojjhatīvavikalaṃ vikalaṅkāśaprabham |
priyatamaṃ yatamantamanīvaraṃ rasikatā sitāsviva tāhu ko ||
What affection is there among women who are addicted to
wealth alone;-being as they are as dry as sand? They abandon
their lover, as if he were dead, even though he be as beautiful as
the stainless moon, and ever ready to please her, only if he
happens to be without wealth. *
'Chiming' at the end of the feet -
suśo'vasare cakitaṃ cakitaṃ bhavastimitaṃ stimitam |
api hāsalavastava
kastukāmadhurā madhurāma ||
'Of the beautiful one the glances are at times most tremulously
mobile, and at times most steady and fixed! What smiles too!
There is nothing-not even the sweet blossom of flowers-that can
equal the sweet girl overflowing with love I'
'Chiming' at the beginning of consecutive feet---
bhramara dumapuṣpāṇi bhrama ratyai vivanmadhu |
kā kundakusume prītiḥ kāūṃ datvā virauṣi yat ||56
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[IV 1 2
O black bee if you seek real happiness, wander among the
flowers of trees, sucking their honey; what pleasure do you expect
to derive from the flower-that you are weeping in pitiable
accents ?
J
4
Thou hast inflicted unbearable pain on the innermost soul of
the woman of the wountry; and along the cheeks of the
ploughmen's wives, tears are flowing copiously."
Chiming' at the end of consecutive feet-
2
3
Chiming in the middle of consecutive feet--
4
abhyaśakyaṃ tvayā dataṃ duḥkhaṃ śakyantarātmani |
bāppo vāhīkanārīṇāṃ verāvāhī kapolayoḥ ||
When a man becomes the object of your glances, beaming
with smiles, and well-equipped with the guiles of love.---his heart
becomes heated with passion. There is no untruth in this. Or
else, how is it that you deprive people of their minds? '
Chiming at the end of two alternate fee'-
udvejayayasya rājñaḥ kuśāsanam |
siṃhāsanaviktasya tasya kṣipraṃ kuśāsanam ||
$
edì paremaêlivàn fragrâm sprazzénûìm |
bhavati vata janaḥsacittadāhare na khaṭu mṛpā kuta evaṃ cittadāho ||
The king whose l ad rule causes trouble to his people is very
soon deprived of his throne and reduced to beggary.'
Chimings in the middle and at the end of alternate feet
may be similarly shown.
'Chiming at the end of the four fect:-
natomatabhūgatabahulāmyāma [lāsya groce, charm].
vilokya tantra rāśīpeśalāsyām | [whose face āsya is soft and
beautiful,
).
mana: kittāmyasi cañcalāsyāma [catrala (heart) āsyama over herl.
an of your sau (The influential (commands),
tar, I should be).
ť
įIV 1 2]
VERBAL FIGURES
my f ckle heart! Why are you pained at seeing that beauti-
ful young girl with gracefully curved eyebrows and face as sweet
and beautiful as the moon? I shall certainly gain my wishes, if the
commands of Cupid have real influence over her.'
Similar examples may be cited of 'Chiming' in the middle
and at the beginning of all the feet. Many other mixed forms of
Chiming can be found out by the learned.
The 'Chiming' of letters.
nānākāraṇa kānnāthūrārādhitamantrebhuvā |
viviktena viṭhāsena tatakṣa hṛdayaṃ nṛṇām ||
57
"The eyebrow of the beloved which has learnt its graces from
the god of love, impressed the hearts of men with its variegated
excellent charms".
Similarly may be found chiming at other points of the verse.
This 'Chiming' of letters has its effectiveness enhanced
when there is close juxtaposition of the same or similar letters (of
the same class). An example of this effectiveness we find in the
following verse of the fa
vividhadhavavanānāgagarvacanānā
vivitatagaganānāmamajajjanānā |
karuyaśalalanānā vavandhundhunānā
mama hihi tatanānānana svasvanānā ||
says to his brother
“The land along the sea is
covered with jungle consisting of various kinds of the tree;
having the sky filled with handsome birds seeking after snakes ;
in which people entering cannot (by reason of the density of the
forest) bend their body; it is entirely devoid of human beings;
with the deer and hare flitting about; capable of destroying our
ememy and thereby accomplishing my purpose;
it has no
outlet; whose rustling constitutes its sole breathing,"
Similar to this excessive 'Chining' of letters is the 'Chiming'
of words.
858
3
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
DIV 3
Chime becomes more effective by breaks (or
cæsura).
4. There are three kinds of this break' called-
gūralā parirvataka and cūrṇa.
5. When we have the transference of the cæsura
caused by the separation of an entire letter we
have the Tam.
As for instance, in the verse cited under 2, in the second
line the words are ',' there being a cæsura between ''
and ''; whereas in the first line the words being
age, the
cæsura is transferred to 'between 'y' and 'or.
Similarly, in
the first line the words are ......,' there being a
cæsura between fand #; whereas in the second line, in the
words 'afety the aforesaid cesura is absent.
6
4
4
6
6. Where on the cessation of the conjunction (of
another letter), a letter resumes its own form,
we have the 'parivartaka '
For instance, in the same verse the letter 'sr' of the word 'n
resumes its own form only after the cessation of its conjunction
with the letter which conjunction gave it the form of the letter
''. In such cases a word ('safềa' ƒ. t.) which, through the con-
junction of certain letters, has been transformed into another word
'ma'-resumes its own form, on the cessation of that conjunction,
Similarly may other instances be found.
As for example-
7-Where on the disruption of a conjunct letter, a
word disappears completely, we have the ap
yo calakulamatrati ca raktaśuktiīnāṃkānta: |
sāgni vibharti ca salilaṃ dūrasamunmuktaśuktimīnāṅkāntaḥ ||
"The lord of the faf fish (the Ocean) protects the family of
mountains, having removed all their grief; he bears within himself
water along with fire,-throwing on all sides the signs of shells
and fishes.-IV. 1,8]
VERBAL FIGURES
59
+
In this verse we have the conjunct letter in the disrup-
tion of this, gives rise to the two words agenge' and 'fauftar'
and the word 'g' becomes entirely obliterated.
In connection with this subject we have the following
Verses-
'Where we have the transference of the unbroken (entire)
letter or syllable, we have the ger; by this break the Chime
becomes very effective.' (1)
'In a case where a syllable renounces its conjunction with
one syllable and joins itself to another, and thereby gives shape
to another word-like the actor renouncing one part and taking
another that is the ff'. (2).
'When of a conjunct letter, each of the constituent letters be-
comes joined to the words preceding and following it respectively,
leading to the complete disappearance of the previous word;-it is
the cūrṇaka (3)
'Even when the Chimes are in their proper places, if they are
not beautified by this lastafa break, they are not quite beautiful;
in the same manner as the hair, even though in its place, does not
appear charming until it is beautified by curls.' (4)
'When the break is brought about by the transformation of
case-endings, it is not regarded as Chime by people learned in the
excellences of Chimes.' (5)
'When a word has been often made the object of Chime, it is
not right to further make it an object of Alliteration.' (6)
The wonders of Chime consist in the separation of case-
endings, both as regards number and case, and also in the repetition
of nouns and verbs.' (7)
$
8. [Similar words and letters] other [than those speci-
fied under Chime] constitute Alliteration.
Other than those, &c.-That is to say, words and letters with
the same or different meanings, at the same or at any points in the
verse.KAVYALAMKARA ŠUTRA
to what has been used once
the form
Why was not the definition in the given in
Others constitute Alliteration? This definition could
have been explained to mean that Alliteration consists in the
other kinds of repetition.
60
Similar
Object on
"
[IV 1 8
Reply-True: the definition would have been quite com-
prehensible as that consisting in other kinds of repetition'; but
such a definition would be too wide. [As the repetition of dissimi-
lar words and letters also would become 'alliteration' as this also
would be a kind of repeption other than those enumerated under
Chime'). It is with a view to specify the particular kinds of
repetition intended that the has added the word 'Similar'; this
*Similarity' consisting either in the entire word or both in entirety
and in parts.
>
1
NOTE-The QUATT (1X. 83-48) defines Chime as that where the same
leiters are repeated, but they should not be used in the same meaning in both
places; if they have a meaning, they should have different meanings in the different
places. The adds that in some cases Chiming is allowed in the case of
different letters also: when the sounds of the letters are similai, e. g between
'ḍaॅ' and 'lu'
ra and la
' and '' and '#', and also between a
letter with the fa and the same without it; a letter with the staff and the
same without it. As regards chiming in a verse, it is laid down that there should
be chiming either in all four feet or in two feet only, it should never be in three
feet; in fact the presence of Chime in three feet is regarded as a defect. In the
case of Chiming of more than one letter, they should occur in the same order in
both cases. Herein lies the difference between 'Chime' and 'Alliteration. In the
latter, it is not necessary that the letters should appear in the same ordur; nor is
it necessary for the words to have different meanings,
9. That Alliteration of letters is of the superior
kind which is not too glaringly conspicuous.
*Not too glaringly conspicuous-i, e. as if hidden, not easily
noticeable.
Example-
paraguzieć prazóta aruzga
kacinmasṛṇamāṃsalaṃ citī tārās
prasanabha muhuḥ svarataraṅgalāṅketam |
irda hi taba vakīṇitanigamagrasphataṃ
manomadayatīva meṃ kimapi sādhu saṃgītakam ||VERBAL F CURES
An excellent music is exhilarating my mind; this music
is at one time soft and sweet, and at another it is extremely
loud; often delightfully beautiful, marked by the harmonious
blending of note-waves; mixed up with the jinglings of your lute,
IV
101
61
The Alliteration that is too glaringly conspicuous is not regard-
ed as good.
6
3
vallībadhdordhvajuṭodbhaṭamaṭati raṭarakoṭikoṭaṇḍadaṇḍa: ||
10. The 'feet Alliteration' is similar to the feet
Chime.'
That is to say, the different kinds of the Alliteration of the
verse-fect are to be classed and enumerated on the same lines as
the Chime of the verse-feet.
Examples
kavirājamavijñāya kuta: kāvyaśiyādaraḥ |
kavirājaṃ ca vijñāya kutaḥ kāvyaviyādaraḥ ||
*Unless one knows
whence could he have any regard
for the composition of poetry ? and when one knows how
could he have any regard (or desire) for composing poetry?
ākhaṇḍayānta muhurāmalakīphalāni |
vālāni vālakaṣilocanapiṅgalāni ||
They eat the fresh amalaki fruits, yellow like the eyes of the
young monkey.
vastrāyante nadīnāṃ sitakusumabarāḥ śrīśa saṃkāśakāśā:
kāśāyā bhānti tāsāṃ navalanagatāḥ anihiṃ haṃsā: |
haṃsābhāmbhoktaḥ phurakṣmalarucimedinīcandra candraḥ
candrāṅkaḥ śāraśte jayakṛta viduṣāṃ kā kālaḥ ||
'O King, who art equal to the grass with white
flowers appears like clothing over the rivers: O King, who art
like a swan in the river of Prosperity on the banks of the rivers,
swans are seen which ressemble the grass; O King, who art like
Moon on the Earth I the Moon emerging from the swan-like white
clouds is shining with flawless sheen: O King, who art like Death-
god to your enemies! the season of autumn beautified by the moon
has arrived, which will bring victory to you.'62
.
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
kuvatyadalaśyāmā meghā vidrāya diva gatā
kuvayamlayāmo nidrā vimuñcati keśavaḥ |
p
FASTGERMA! KAINeara Egenà
kuvalayadalaśyāmaṃ candro namaḥ pravigāhate ||
The clouds dark like the petal of the blue lotus have gone
away from the skies: f, dark like the petals of the blue lotus, is
abandoning his sleep: the creeper dark like the petals of the
lotus is now beginning to shoot forth; and the moon is appearing in
the sky which bears the colour of the petals of the blue lotus,"
And so on may the other varieties be exemplified.
NOTE The
divides Alliteration into two classes-(1) Alliteration of
letters, in which there is repetition of letters, which have no meaning by themselves,
and (2) Alliteration of words, where there is repetition of words with meanings In
the former, the mere similarity of the consonant is sufficient to establish Allitera-
(ion, irrespective of the vowel-sounds This Alliteration of letters is of two kinds. -
chekāḍagrāsa -tbe repetition of a single consonant, and (4) ityanuprāsa --two
more repetitions of one or more consonants In the Alteration of Words, the
same word or words with the same meaning, is repeated in more than one place,
though with different syutactical connections; to this Aliteration has been given
the name of RZUTA in view of the fact that it is much in favour with writers of
the Lata country.
[İV 2 0
Section II.
THE IDEAL FIGURES OF SPEECH.
The Ideal Figures of Speech are next dealt with; and as Simile
lies at the root of all ideal figures, the Sutra takes up Simile-
1. Simile' consists in the slightest resemblance of
qualities between two things called the HIT¹
and the 'upameya
upamāna
The '' is that object possessed of superior qualities with
which the resemblance or similarity of another object is pointed
out; and the 's' is thar other object with inferior qualities which
is pointed out as resembling the former; and the resemblance or
similarity between these two objects,-even on the basis of
slight qualities,-constitutes the figure of 'Simile,'IV 2 2]
THE IDEAL F GURES OF SPEECH
'upameya'
An objection is raised:' and 'sa' being relative
terms, the mention of one would necessarily indicate the other; as
for instance, in Panini's mutra-upamitaṃ vyāghrādibhiḥ sāmānyāprayoge [Il-i-561,
it is only the saíña (i. e. e) that is mentioned and not the
gqy also (which is implied by the other). In the same manner, in
the present Sitra also, both should not have been mentioned.
63
This is quite true; but both have been mentioned with a view
to indicate what is well known among people; the sense being
that the similarity meant is between two objects known among
people as # and eqà¤, -nothing except these; that is to say,
we have only such Similes as 'the face is like the lotus', and not
as the face is like the lily.'
2.
t
That which is dependent upon a large number of
qualities, is 'imaginary' Simile.
The similarity that is assumed by poets on the basis of a large
number of common qualities, is called 'imaginary Simile', as in
contrast with what has been defined in the preceding, which is
well-known among the people (and may be called 'real').
Objection:- In the case of imaginary Simile, inasmuch as the
similarity is not known among ordinary people, how can there be
any restriction as to the T and the 3, (which have been
described as names based upon similarities recognised by the
common prople)?"
Such restriction, we reply, is obtained through the excellence
(preponderance) and inferiority (deficiency) of the multitude of
qualities. As for example, in the following-
'The disc of the moon, which resembles the breast of the F
woman pressed by her lover, lightens up the sky with the rays of
light which are as white as the fullgrown smell of the lotus-plant-
[The similarity between the breasts and the lunar disc, and
that between the moon's rays and the lotus-smell. are not such as
are known to the ordinary man: they are imagined or fancied by
the poet on the basis of a large number of common qualities.]KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[IV 22
Similarly in the following also the similarity is 'imagined'
and not real.
64
(a) The orange resembles the newly-shaven chin of the
intoxicated gar'.
The ar flower in the ear resembles the fresh sprout
·
G
of kusha'.
(c) 'At the present moment the branches of the banyan tree
with their root-offshoots having shed the red leaves, resembles the
beak of the parrot; and after a while there come out the red leaves
which are capable of equalling the beauty of the lips of young
women".
€
3. Of Simile there are two kinds; one based upon the
meaning of words, and another based upon
the meaning of sentences.
Example of Simile based upon the meaning of words-
*Over whose bodies freed from the tawny skin, there appears
horripilation due to feelings of love--the hairs standing erect
resembling so many dusts of gold."
Example of the Simile based upon the meaning of a sentence
This King has the necklace hanging over his shoulders,
and has his body besmeared with fresh sandal-paint; in this man-
ner he resembles the Chief of Mountains with the waterfall rushing
along its sides, and having its peaks reddened with the rays of the
newly risen sun.
♥
4. Simile again is-Complete and Elliptical.
5.
mpy Pigend
We have the Complete Simile when the sentence
contains words denoting all the factors of
comparison-viz., (a) the common property, (b)
similitude, (c) the standard of comparison and
(d) the object of comparison.
As for example:-
*Beautiful () like (b) the lotus (c) is the face (d),'THE IDEAL FIGURES OF SPEECH
65
6
It is elliptical when there is absence [of one or
more of the aforesaid factors of comparison].
IV 2 9]
(a) Absence of the word denoting the common property-
The King is like the Moon.
.
(b) Absence of the word denoting similitude-
This is grass-green.
4
(c) Absence of both of the above---
'The moon-faced.'
Examples of the absence of the standard of the object com-
pared shall be found below, under the next section.
NAP
7. Simile is employed in (a) praising, (b) dispraising
and (c) describing the real state of things.
Examples-
(a) 'An affectionate wife is like nectar -(Praise).
(b) 'A wife not possessed of good qualities is like poison -
(Dispraise).
(c) 'Among the groups of stars know that to be the asterism
of Rohini which appears in the shape of a cart. '-(describing the
real state of things).
8. The defects of Simile are-(a) Deficiency (In-
completeness). (b) Excess, (c) Disparity of
Gender, (b) Disparity of Number, (e) Non-
similitude, and (f) Impossibility (Incongruity).
Each of these is next described:-
9
9. (a) When the 'standard of comparison' is inferior
(to the 'object compared') in caste, in magnitude,
and in details of quality, the Simile is said to be
'deficient,'66
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[III 2 9
Examples
(a) Inferiority of the 'standard' of comparison' in caste-
"This act of daring has been done by you, like a Chandala.
(b) Inferiority in magnitude-
'The Sun is shining like a spark of fire,
(c) Inferiority in details of quality--
The sage, adorned by the girdle-string and wearing the
black antelope-skin, shone like the Sun surrounded by dark clouds.
1
+
In this case, in the 'standard of comparison,' the Sun, we find
no mention of the 'lightning' which would take the place of the
girdle-string in the 'object of comparison, the sage. It will not
be right to argue that it is only the black antelope skin that is inten-
ded to be the object compared'; for in that case, the mention of
the 'girdle-string' would be superfluous. Nor will it be right to
argue that the mention of the 'dark clouds' implies the lightning:
for as a matter of fact, there is no such necessary connection
between the two, as would make the one necessarily imply the
other; if there were such connection, what would be there to
prevent the idea of one being brought about by the idea of the
other?
It is with a view to this that we have the next T-
10. Of two things, the mention of one brings about
the idea of (implies) the others when there is
concomitance between them.
When two things are known to be concomitant with each other.
the mention of one necessarily implies the other. As for example
in the following verse-
'Even though rain outside has ceased, there is no cessation of
the drops of water falling from within the dilapidated house, passing
as they do through spider's nets, and thereby becoming yellowish
and resembling drops of honey; these drops falling upon the curly
hair on the head of the sleeping child become broken into small
sprays, and making the child to throw about its limbs, they causeIV 2.11]
THE IDEAL FIGURES OF SPEZCH
great mental agony to the house-wife whose sleep is disturbed,
the yellowness and roundness are found to be concomitant with each
other in all drops of honey; hence when the yellowness is expressed
by the word 'f' it brings about the idea of the roundness also.
4
3
Similarly in the case of the sentence- The hips are as smooth
as a sheet of gold',-inasmuch smoothness and brightness are found
to be concomitant in the 'sheet of gold', brightness is implied by
the mention of smoothness."
67
f
4
_
An objection is raised"If the fact of the standard of com-
parison' being wanting in certain details of quality is a defect of
the Simile, how have we the following-
the
'Like chaste women deprived of their husbands in their houses
sound died in the mouths of those peacocks whose eyes
were closed on account of the hot rays of the sun, who were in a
sorry plight, having been deprived of joy by the wind flowing from
among the lotuses ' ; -
where the 'object compared' (the sound) has many more
qualities mentioned than the standard of comparison' ('chaste
women ')"?
This objection is not enable,-bacause the large number of
qualities are mentioned (not with a view to comparison) but only
with a view to point out the special features of the mouths in
which the sound ceased; it is only when the peacock's mouth has
certain special characters, that the cessation of sound is possible.
11. (b) By the above definition of 'Deficiency,' the
defect of 'Excess' has been explained.
That is to say, 'Excess' consists in the superiority of the
'standard of comparison' in caste, magnitude and quality.
Examples-
(a) 'Let the Vrsnis enter like the mighty Rudras.'
[The Rudras are very much higher beings than the people.]
(b) 'Thy navel is like the nether world; like mountains thy
breasts; and thy braided tresses resemble the fall of the AN 1.68
KAVYALAMKĀRA SUTRA
[The nether world, mountain and the fall of the at are
of very much larger magnitudes than the things to which they are
compared.]
1
IV 2 12
(c) The King holding the moving discus with its olfshoots,
resembled the ocean with the submarine fire and whirlpool.'
In the object compared, the King with the discus, there is
nothing to resemble the presence of the submarine fire in the ocean
the standard of comparison.'
Some writers hold 'viparyaya' or
contrariety' to be a defect of
Simile; but in reality this is included in the two defects 'Deficiency"
and 'Excess' described above; it is for this reason that we hold
the opinion that of Simile there are only six defects (mentioned
above in sūtra 8).
12. (c) There is 'Diversity of Gender' when the
gender of the object compared is different from
that of the standard of comparison.
Example-
sainyāni natha iva jagmuranargalāni |
+
"The armies went along unimpeded like a river' [is
feminine, and, neuter.]
13. In many cases however comparison between the
masculine and the neuter is allowable.
In many cases it is permissible to have the 'object compared'
in the masculine and the standard of comparison in the neuter
gender, and vice versa. e. g., 'azíña và qxg-He sees the face
which is like the moon.' [This is allowable only in cases where
the forms of the two words in the two genders are similar, as in
the instance cited '' and '] Such diversity of gender
'mukhas' 'candrama.']
however (in which the forms are different) is not allowable ; e. g.
'induriva mūrkha bhāti' (the face shines like the Moon).IV 2 16]
THE IDEAL FIGURES OF SPEECH
69
14 [Disparity of genders is allowable] also (a) in
Similes employed in ordinary parlance, (b) in
Similes expressed by means of compounds, and
(c) in the various modifiations of the Simile.
Examples-
(a) In ordinary parlance people speak of one's constant
companion as 'sa tasya chāyeva ' ' he is like his shadow' ('sa' beng
masculine and '' feminine.)
6
(b) Gender-disparity in compounds bhujalatā nīlotpalasadṛśī, '
the creeper-like arm is like the blue lotus. '
[Where a similarity is intended between ''masculine and
'feminine; and also between this latter and
'neuter. ]
(c) In the modifications of Simile: e. g. in the following verse
(where the Simile is not directly asserted but indirectly implied)---
sudhdāntadurlabhamidaṃ varāmavāsino yadi janasya |
dūrīkṛtāḥ khalu guṇairuyānalatā vanalatābhiḥ ||
E
If the body of this person living in the hermitage is such as
cannot be found in the harem of Kings,then verily has the well-
tended creeper of the garden been surpassed in beauty by the wild
creeper.
[Here the similitude implied is between the body, a neuter
and the creeper, ‘war' feminine.]
Similarly may other usages be exemplified.
15. (d) What has been said above with regard to
disparity of Gender applies to disparity of
Number also.
Example of Disparity of Number-
paśyāmi locane tasyāḥ puṣpaṃ puppaliddo yathā |
'I look upon her Eyes as the black bee does upon the flower?
16. (e) There is 'non-similitude' when the similarity
of qualities intended to be expressed is not
fully comprehended.
As for example, in the line-KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[Hİ 2. 7
*I am going to prepare the moon of poetry with its meanin
expanding like the moon's rays'-it is not easily comprehensible
what similarity is intended between Poetry and the Moon.
70
But it is easy to perceive that the meaning being similar to
the rays, this would constitute the necessary similarity between
the Poetry and the Moon."
+
Not so for it is only after the similarity between Poetry and
Moon has been established that any similarity is possible between
the meaning and the rays; specially as there is no property in
common between these laiter, which would establish their similarity
(independently of that between the Poetry and the Moon); and
thus there would be an undesirable mutual interdependence (if the
Similarity between Poetry and Moon were based upon that between
the meaning and the rays).
17. By 'non-similitude' the Simile is entirely des-
troyed; as all poets depend (for effect) on that
[ similitude of the two factors ].
18. Some people hold that in a case where there are
a large number of 'standards of comparison'
available, the non-comprehension of the exact
similitude is not faulty.
4
As for instance, in such sentences as your fame is like a
camphor-necklet, and like the similes of the similitude be-
tween the Fame and the Camphor, &c., becomes indicated on the
basis of excessive whiteness.
19. This however is not right; as such use (of many
standards) does not add strength (effectiveness)
to the meaning.
When the required similitude has been indicated by means of
the mention of one'standard of comparison,' the mention of
other such standards does not produce any additional effect. It is
in view of this that we find fault with such lines as 'ærd=g.
frgfta ga:,' the ocean of strength is ruffled like the ocean
[where one and the same standard, 'ocean,' is retained], It may
fàryfica
*IV 2 211
THE IDEAL FIGURES OF SPEECH
be objected that the word 'f' occurring twice involves a
tautology. But in reality there is no tautology, as the word is
used in two different senses; in 'qey; ' which means ' strength
like the ocean,' the 'strength' is spoken of as 'ocean' in view of
its greatness or extensiveness; while in 'yíta aka;,' 'is ruffled
like the 'ocean,' the 'strength' is described as similar to the ocean'
in point of being ruffled; and thus there being distinct implications
intended in the two cases, there is no tautology. But all the same,
the second mention of the ocean' does not produce any additional
effect; for if we had only fryra spa:,' 'ruffled like the ocean.
'sindhuriva ṛbhitaḥ,
this would also
from that of the
8
$
7
imply the idea of greatness which is inseparable
ocean': as it has been declared (above in 10)
that of two things, the mention of one implies the other when there
is concomitance between them.
+
?
20. (f) There is 'Impossibility' or 'Incongruity 'when
something absolutely impossible is mentioned.
As for example, in the verse-
'Within her shining mouth the faint smile appears as beautiful
as the first moonlight within the blooming lotus"-
We find mentioned the blooming of the lotus along with moon-
light; and this is a physical impossibility. It may be objected that
this may be regarded only as an instance of contrary meaning.
whereby the necessity of postulating this as a defect of the Simile
becomes obviated. But this is not right; as in the Simile what is
a particularly effective idea is what is actually intended to be
implied by the Simile; [there is some sort of incongruity always
present in Similes.] It may be asked-'Why then should the
(Incongruity) be regarded as a defect at all (when it is desirable in
Similes)?"
To this we reply-
21. [Because ] an effective implication that is con-
tradictory should never I be used].
The poet knowing the above-mentioned six Defects of Simile
should always avoid them.72
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
Section, (3)
Modifications of the Simile.
The various Modifications of the Simile are next considered.
1. Typical Comparison (¹) and the rest con-
stitute the Modifications of Simile.'
[IV. 3, 1-
The next points out the difference between Typical Com-
parison and the 'Simile in Sentence.
2. It is Typical Comparison () when the
similar thing (the object of comparison) is men-
tioned in one sentence, and the standard of
comparison' in another.
(
€
Thus the difference between Simile and Typical Comparison
is that in the former the complete Similitude is expressed by a
single sentence, while in the latter there are two distinct sentences,
one mentioning the object compared and another the object to
which it is compared.
As an example of the Typical Comparison, we have-
Having attained to the position of the queen how can she be
lowered to the position of a common maid? Verily a jewel marked
with the figure of a deity is not capable of being worn.
[Here the former sentence mentions the woman, who is
intended to be similar to the gem spoken of in the latter sentence.]
The next points out the difference between Typical Com-
parison ( prativastūpamā) and Modal Metaphor (samāsokti),
4
3. When the object of comparison' is not men-
tioned at all, we have the Modal Metaphor,
samāsokti
That is to say, when the similar thing is mentioned, and the
object which it is similar to is not mentioned, we have ma
(Concise Assertion) so called on account of the brevity of form
caused by the dropping of one sentence,-IV. 3.5]
MODIFICATIONS OF THE SIMILE
Exam ple-
"The position of the leafless af plant in the desert is praise-
effor ling relief to the fatigued traveller:
tree on the which does not afford
worthy on account of its
fie upon the glory of the
any relief to the needy.'
73
Here the direct mention of the rich person who does not help
the poor is suppressed.
The next sūtra disinguishes samāsokti from aprastutapraśaṃsā (Indirect
Description).
4. When there is just a slight mention of the object
of comparison, it is magár (Indirect Des-
cription).
Example-
'She i- a most peculiar Ocean of Beauty: herein are floating
lotuses along with the Moon; out of this the temples of elephants
are issuing forth; and herein are also found the stem of the plantain
tree as well as lotus-stalks.
9
[Here the object of comparison, the beautiful woman, is just
slightly mentioned by the pronoun, , She, in the first line.]
This is called
literally 'Praise (Description) of
what is not directly mentioned' because of the fact of the
Object of description not being fully expressed.
This is distinct from
or 'Concealment,'
as shown
below...
5. The Concealment of one thing by another similar
thing is called apahnuti.
W ere one thing mentioned in a sentence is concealed or set
aside or rejected by another thing also mentioned in (another)
sentence with a view to impose the character of the latter upon
the former, we have 'Concealment.
1
1074
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
+
Example-
'What are seen in the
flower are not its shoo s; they are
the (taunting) smiles of Fate against people straying from home,
What flashes yonder is not the lightning; it is the glit ering gleam
of the Love--God.
[IV. 3. 6-
Here the shoots are 'concealed' or set aside by the
"Smiles of Fate,' and the lightning by the 'Glitter of the Love-
God.')
laasmuch as in this the similarity is indicated by two distinct
sentences, this differs from $75, Metaphor.
The Tor Metaphor is next d fined-
d
6. By reason of the similitude of qualities between
the object compared' and the standard of
comparison, where the character of one is
imposed up onthe other, it is or Metaphor.
4
6
That is to say, where the one is described as identical with
the other. The mentions both--the object compared as well as
the standard of comparis n-with a view to show that M taphor
has for its base not only the fancied or imaginary Simi'e, but also
one that is real, recognised in ordinary experience.
Example-
She is in my household, a streak of nectar to my eyes;
this touch of hers is a copious flow of sandal-essence over my
body: this arm round my neck is the cool and soft string of
pearls: what of hers is not lovealle I but separation from her
would be unbearable!
In such expressions as the moon-face, we have Simile, and not
Metaphor, even though the two words are compounded; because
it expresses simialrity and not identity.
The next distinguishes Metaphor from (Coalescence or
Paronomasia);--IV.3.7]
MODIFICATIONS OF THE SIMILE
or Paronomasia, when through coalescence
of letter-sounds, there is an imposition of
identity upon the properties of the object of
comparison [by the object to which it is
compared].
7. It is
75
That is to say, when, in virtue of the coalescence of letter-
sounds [even when there is similarity in the meaning, the object
to which the object in question is compared imposes its identity
upon the quality, action and name of the latter object, we have
what is called , (Coalescence) or Paronomasia.
Example:-
ākuṭāmalamaṇḍaḍāyarucayaḥ saṃnadhdavakṣaḥsthalāḥ
sopmāṇo vrāṇatā vipakṣahayapranmiārthinaḥ karkaśāḥ |
uttaguraśca yamya śamina: śyāmāyamānānanā
yoṣā māravadhūstanāśca na thuḥ kṣobhaṃ sa vo vyājinaḥ ||
'May that great Jina protect you whom' calm and collected,
neither warriors nor the bre. sts of woman succeeded in disturbing,
the warriors and the breasts beth being (a) Nihan'SSIUSAY:
(the warriors having taken upon themselves the glory of defeated
armies, and the breasts having shinning orbs and fronts], (b)
: [the warriors with shinning breast-plates, and the
breasts tightening or adorning the chesi], (c) : [the warriors
endowed with ardour for battle, and the breasts glowing with
passion), (d) [the warriors covered with scars, and the
breasts bearing the nailmarks]. (e) fâquaçudì-mêm: [the warriors
destroying the hearts of enemies, and the breasts causing pain to
rivals), (ƒ) #har: (the warriors hardened by battle, and the breasts
thickest and hard]. (g) : [ he warriors proud and haughty, and
the breasts over-flowing their bounds] (h) gra: [warriors respect-
able and the breasts heavy) and (i) sumar: (the warriors with
darkened face, and the breasts with blackened ups.]'
In this the same set of epithets is applied to both the
object of comparison, the breasts, and the object to which it is
compared, the warriors; though the similarity rests only in sound:KAVYALAMKARA Sūtra
76
[IV 3 8-
words with different meanings coalescing together and pronounce.c
as one word; and this Coalescence indicates intended similarity]
NOTE. Under iffst 85, the ISIN discusses the question as to whether
is a Verbal or an Ideal figure of speech. T
figure. The
Ten the other hand, divides it
of the Verbal and the Ideal; the Verbal
is that
with different meanings, coalesce in their letter-sounds
Ideal *ỒT is that
makes it a purely ideal
into two distinct classes
where words, though
(sifær 84); and the
where several meanings are gut out of a single sentence."
(kārikā 96).
"
The next proceeds to show that a figure of Speech consists
not only in the secondary or implied meaning, but also in the
indicated meaning :-
8. When the Indication (of things) is based upon
similarity, we have the (Homonym)
ax
There are many bases for Indication; from among these, when
it is upon similanty that the Indication is based it affords an
instance of the figure Homonym. As for example, in the line-
(a) afmīla kamalaṃ sarasīnāṃ karavaṃ ca nimimīla bahatīt |
'In the I kes, the lotus bloomed (opened) and in a moment
the lily drooped closed.'--
The opening and the closing, really belonging to the eye indi-
cate the blooming and drooping; and this indication is through
similarity.
(b) Herein ft with its fresh-blooming bud captivates the
heart, and the breathing of the pollens fagiant with honey is
quite exhilarating.'
In this 'brea hing' indicates the issuing of the sweet smell.
Similarly in the following lines, what is indicated is easily
comprehended-
(c) May the beaut ful one rise to kiss the heavens'
[Kissing' indicates touching]IV.3.9] MODIFICATIONS OF THE SIMILE
(d) *Lassitude embraces her body'
[Embracing indicates affecting].
(e) 'The glar ce repeats the faded lotus"
[Repeating' indicates imitation.]
B
(f) In the morning the pungency (of the wind) is a com-
panion of the fragrance of the blooming Jotus.'
['Companion' indicates association or co-existence.)
(g) The two thighs are the fellow-students of the plantain-
stem.'
stem
77
('Fellow-student' indicates similarity of shape.]
The secret of true Indication lies in the quickness with which
its real sense is comprehended. That indication which is not
based upon Similarity does not constitute the figure of Homonym:
as for example, in the line--
The beams whi e like slices of the well-developed lotus-
the slice indicates the substance to which it belongs, through
proximity (and not through similarity); as it is the substance-the
lotus-stem-itself that is white.
The next points out the difference of an (Poetic Fancy)
from Metaphor and Hom-nym.
9. When what is not similar or cognate with
another is represented, for the purpose
of showing its excellence as similar or
cognate, it is 'Poetic Fancy' sedem.
In this there is actual representation and not absolute imposition
(as in Metaphor) or indication (as in Homonym). This represent-
ation again is by way of showing some excellence; and not as
a misconcepti. n (r mistaken identi y)
1
This Poetic Fancy also is based upon similarity; and as such
it is illuminated by such words and particles as 'T' and the like.
Example--
1
May the Moon protect you! The Moon who is curved, like
the end of a fresh lotus-stem, is placed on a's forehead which78
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[IV 3 10-
is yellow like fire: being daily besprinkled with sprays from the
dripping #ſt; shooting out like a sprout from the crystal-white
forehead.'
[Here in the likening of the Moon to the 'sprout' lies the
Poetic Fancy: there being no actual similarity between the two;
the representation as such serving the purpose of showing the
peculiar beauty of the Moon.]
Some people hold that saati (Hyperbole) is the same as
Poetic Fancy; this is dered in the following
10
When there is an assumption of some fancied
property or superior excellence of property, it
is Hyperbole,
Example---
'If in the sky there could appear two concurrent streams of
the celestial T to that alone could be compared his blue chest
adorned with the pearl-necklace."
[Here the concurrent streams have been assumed for the
purpose of indicating the excellence of the chest; to which nothing
that exists can be regarded as similar.]
Another example--
"The Moon shin ng brightly, lovely women repair to their
lovers with joy and free from fear; having their bodies clothed
in white raiments, undistinguishable from the moonlight by reason
of their bodies being besmeared with sandal-plaint, their necks
glittering with pearl-necklaces, their faces shining with the white
paintings.**
[Herein the superior excellence of the woman's complexion
&c. is assumed ]
Just as Metaphor consists in some form of misconception, s0
we have the figure Dubious, which is based upon c'oubtful
conceptions; this is explained in the next FI
*The $PAINT cites this as an ex-mple of the figure GIFJ.
sparvevahelthIV 3 12]
MODIFICATIONS of the SIMILE
79
11. When there is some doubt as to the character of
the object and the standard of comparison, it is the
. Dubious.
That is, when the doubt is put forward for the purpose of
implying some excellence in the object compared.
Example---
*Q beautiful one! My heart cannot ascertain whether this is
a lotus at your ear or your eye; it remains wavering in un-
certainty.'
The next defines y or 'Contradiction.'
12. Where there is semblance of contradiction we
have the figure Contradiction.
That is, where things. not really contradictory, appear as such.
Example-
'Wonderful is the way of Love, O beloved one! The wine
has been drunk by you, while it is my mind that is intoxicated
(with the feeling of love); you have painted your body with saffron,
while it is I who am red (in love): it is you whose movement is
slackened by reason of the weight of your breasts, while the
consequent trembling appears in me; it is you who are slender in
waist, and yet the consequent instability is mine !'
[Here there is a semblance of contradiction-(1) in the fact of
the intoxication appearing in a person other than the one who
drinks the wine ;-(2) in that the redness appears in place other
than that where the saffron has been applied;-(3) in that the
trembling appears in a place other than where it is due; -and (4)
in that the instability appears not where it should but elsewhere.
It is on'y a semblance of contradiction in all these cases, because,-
in (1) what is meant by intoxication is not the condition caused by
wine, but that which is brought about by feelings of excessive love;
in (2) ‘rakta' does not mean red but attached, in love; in (3) the
trembling is not what is caused by a heavy burden, but one of the
physical manifestations of excessive love; and in (4) also the
instability is not meant to be that due to tender limbs, but that
caused by excessive emotion.]8
BO
●
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
An ther similar example-
While she is young it is I who am shy in speech; she is a
woman while it is 1 who am timid; she has heavy and high breasts,
and it is I who am feeling fatigued; she is endowed with heavy
thighs, and it is I who am unable to move; how wonderful it is that
I am suffering from disabilities that are due to the defects of
another person 'l
IV 3 13-
[Here all the defects indicated are the effects of excessive
passion; and not due to the purely physical causes mentioned.]
?
The next points out the distinction between Cntradiction
and Peculiar Causation-
When the presence of a certain action is denied,
and yet the presence or manifestation of the
well-known result of that action is affirmed,-
it is the figure of fama or Peculiar Causation.
Example-
'In the naturally pure hearts of the wise, no impression is
made, even by the company of the wicked,"
The figure
Unique (Comparison Absolute) is next
described-
14. It is the figure Unique' or Comparison Absolute,
when one and the same object is both the
object and the standard of comparison.
*
Example-
+
As the sky is like the sky; and the ocean like the cean-
the battle between U and is like that between U and wa
4
What is implied by this f gure is that the object described is
unique, nothing else bearing similarity to it.
15. When the same object is made the 'standard of
comparison' in one clause and the object of
comparison in another, it is a or
upameyopamā
Reciprocal Comparison'.IV 3 17]
Example
"The water is like the sky and the sky is like the water; the
moon like the swan, and the swan is like the moon; the stars are
like lilies and like stars the lilies.'
MODIFICATIONS OF THE SIMILE
Some people regard the Reciprocal Comparison to be the
same as fgf or Exchange: that this is not right is shown by the
next sūtra ---
16. Where there is an interchange of like or unlike
things, it is 'Exchange'. •
Example of the exchange of likes--
The young woman takes the leaf of the lotus for ear-ornament,
and imparts to it the redness of her feet; in this the exchange
being of two similar things, is but fair, I ween.'
Example of the exchange of unlikes--
'Of indomitable will, she gave up her necklace and sandal-
paints, and bound up her chest with red barkgarment, which had
its seams bursting with the rising breasts."
[Here was an exchange between the necklace and the bark
garment, two very dissimilar things.]
#9
The next shows that figure or Sequence' is different
from 'Reciprocal Comparison,'
17. Where there is a sequential or consecutive con-
nection between a number of standards' and
objects' of comparison,-it is 'Sequence."
That is to say, when the objects are mentioned in the same
order respectively as the standards to which they are compared.
Example--
'By her (a) sweet voice. (b) smiles and (c) eyes, have been
subdued (a) the lute, (b) the lily and (c) the lotus.'
Through association by similarity, the or
is next described-
11
4
Illuminator'82
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[IV 3 18-
18. When there is a single verb common to a number
of clauses mentioning the objects, and to
those mentioning the 'standards' of comparison,
it is the Illuminator."
4
That is, when one and the same verb is related by trans-
ference to both clauses.
19. The Illuminator is of three kinds, according as the
common verb occurs at the beginning, in the
middle, or at the end of the sentence.
(a) Example of the Common Verb at the beginning-
'Adorned are the harem gardens with young flowers,-young
women with graces beautified by the charms of spring, the gra
with the performance of duties enjoined in the Veda-and the
Kings with their glory born of the suppression of enemies.'
(b) of the Common Verb in the middle-
"The tears of the wives of the people away from home,-and
the rain from the clouds,-are now falling off, as also tho conquer-
ing expedition of the King."
(c) Of the Common Verb at the end-
wwww.
Pakankų.
p
Intelligence by serving the teacher,-love by drinking-and
the Ocean by the rise of the moon,-is augmented."
The next shows that like the Illuminator the or
'Illustration also involves an abbreviation -
rṣa
J
20. When a certain action indicates or points to a
relationship or connection between itself and
its cause, it is 'Illustration. "
That is to say, when a certain action is mentioned with its own
cause-something that brings it about--the differentiation
between Cause, Effect and Example being included therein.--
it is Illustration.-IV. 3. 21 }
MODIFICATIONS OF THE SIMILE
Example-
'The faded leaf is falling from the tree, pointing out to rich
men the fact that the attainment of a very high position always leads
to fall.'
83
Here by means of the clause 'pointing out to ich men
is indicated the relation between the action of 'falling' and its cause
'the attainment of high position."
NOTE-The Illustration herein defined is defined in the
NEUTEI
*
8 as the second kind of Illustration; the first kind being defined in K. 97 as that
wherein an impossible relation of things establishes similitude', the .example cited
being- Where on one side is the family of Raghu, where on the other, my
limited intellect Through sheer foolbardiness am I going to cross over the ocean
by means of a raft.'
The next points out the difference between Illustration and
spugna or 'Transition.'
21. When in support of the statement of one fact,
there is a statement of another,-it is 'Tran-
sition.'
4
Inasmuch as the statement in support should be one of fact,
expressed by a whole sentence, the mere mention of a reason by
means of the Ablative does not constitute Transition; e. g.-in the
sentence the lake cannot be very far,-because we perceive the
smell of lotuses' [ the perception of smell is put forward as
a reason by means of the Ablative word mandingsta.
A
The definition mentions the 'statement of another fact,' in
order to indicate that we have this figure only where the exact
nature of the inferential reason and premiss is not quite explicitly
stated; this precludes such statements of distinct inferential
reasoning as that which has a beginning is transient,' and so
forth.
Example of Transition-
On her plump breasts was placed by the lover a garland, in
the presence of her rivals,--this garland, even when withered with
damp, she did not throw away: the value of a present lies in the
love that prompts it, and not in the thing itself'.KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[IV 3 22
The last senter ce the value &c. supplies the reason, in an
implicit form, why the woman did not throw away the garland.]
Some people have held that, "Transition is not different
from or Negation of Similitude (Dissimilitude), because the
former consists in the statement of a reason, and the reason consiste
of affirmation or negation of Similitude (the latter thus constituting
only a form of Transition);" in refutation of this view, we have
the next supplying the definition of st or Negation of
Similitude,
22. The Dissimilitude consists in the pointing out of
the superiority (to the standard of comparison, of the
object compared).
That is to say, where the object described it pointed out
as possessing qualities superior to those possessed by other similar
objects.
Example
Really would the beautiful face of the fawn-eyed woman be
similar to the moon; but the latter is spoilt by the dark marks."
Here the quality of comparison, beauty, is explicitly stated.)
In some cases the quality is not explicitly stated: it is only
implicitly implied. As for example-
4
By thy sweet and graceful oblique glances, the cluster of
blue loluses has been set at nought,...fresh honey has been put to
shame,-nectar has been derided-the highest relish has been
lowered in its sweetness, and poison, in the shape of anxious
longing has been inserted in the hearts of lovers.*
The next points out the difference between Dissimilitude
and fat or 'Peculiar Allegation -
23. Where the similarity is strengthened by the
assumption of the absence of some one quality,
it is 'Peculiar Allegation.'IV 3 24]
MODIFICATIONS OF THE SIMILE
That is to say where one point of dissimilarity is mentioned
with a view to accentuate the other points of similarity, it is
Pecular Allegation. This figure in almost all cases, involves
a Metaphor.
Examples---
(a) 'Wherein the effulgent herbs become the lamps of
dalliance without ofl.
(b) 'Gambling is man's kingdom, without a throne."
(c) 'Sleep is a without the lotus.
.
(d) The elephant is a moving fort.
In the last example the epithet moving indicales absence of
fixity or immobility, and as such herein also we have absence
*
of a quality as mentioned in the definition: the same holds good
with reference to the following also-
The prostitute is embodied [not bodiless] deceit.'.
*Horrible is death with breathing [not breathless]."
The gra is gyrafat on Earth [not away from the earth)."
↓
NOTE--The ET (X. 108) defines Peculiar Allegation as the non-men-
tion of the effect in the presence of the fully efficient cause; and makes it the
converse of Peculiar Causation, which consists in the men'ion of the effect in the
absence of its cause,
?
The next
defines
for. Dissembling, Eulogy as
distinct from Dissimilitude and Peculiar Allegation--
*
,
<
O
24. Where, for the purpose of praising a person,
there is a deprecation based upon his not doing
something that has been done by a very
superior person, and which, (it is implied) is
capable of being done (by the person sought to
6
be praised), it is Dissembling Eulogy."
This kind of praise consists in implying the similarity of the
person described with the very superior, person mentioned.
186
KÄVYÄLAMKÄRA SUTRA
Example-
Abridged up the Ocean with hills, and with a single arrow
he pierced seven palm trces; not having done these yet, thou
bearest an unaccountable pride."
[IV. 3. 25-
[The sense of this is that on all other points, except the two
mentioned, thou art quite equal to TM,']
The
Dissembling Eulogy---
or Artful Assertion is next distinguished from
25. When the pretence (the pretended thing) is
spoken of as similar to the real, it is Artful
Assertion.
Also called 'māyokki,'
Example-
' With the moon-white grass-flower blown with the wind, thy
face is made to appear as if with drops of tears."
The next points out ea or Equal Pairing as
distinct from Artful Assertion.
www
26. When, for the purpose of indicating equality
with a superior person or thing, the person or
thing described is mentioned as endowed with
the same action and at the same time (as the
superior person or thing),-it is Equal Pairing.
Example-
-"The Lord of Serpents, as well as your arm, bears the burden
of the whole of this sea-girt earth.'
27: When there is repudiation or rejection of the
standard of comparison, it is my of Dis-
paragement [also called 'Hint'- see below].
The standard of comparison is rejected, for the purpose of
indicating that it is uselees in the presence of the object described-IV. 3. 28]
MODIFICATIONS OF THE SIMILE
87
Example-
'In the presence of her beautiful face, where is the use of the
full moon? When her charming eyes are there what is the use of
blue lotuses? What too is the use of the fresh leaves, in the
presence of her lips? How wonderful in the Creator's desire to
bring into existence useless things over and over again!"
The above
defining the figure ¶ may also be taken
to mean that the figure is present when the standard of com-
parison' is only hinted at (and is not directly comprehensible) [and
the figure then is called in the sense of 'Hint' see
K. 106-7.]
Example of 'Hint '-
BASHA
'The Autumn, bearing upon her white clouds [breasts] the
rainbow ressembling the nail-mark, proceeds to appease make
beautiful] the blameworthy [dark-marked] Moon, and thereby
causes heat [pain] to the Sun.*
In this verse, what is hinted at is that the Autumn is like
a prostitute, the Moon like the favoured lover, and the Sun like
his rival, the prostitute,' the 'lover' and the 'rival lover,"
being merely hinted at.
The next 4 points out the difference of or 'Connected
Description' from "Equal Pairing.'
28. When the two actions of two things are descri-
bed, by means of a single word, as occuring at
the same time, it is or Connected
Description.*
Such description of simultaneous actions is through the use of
the word as (together with) or some word having the same sense.
Example
*The sun has gone to set, along with the enemies; therefore
withdraw the forces."
In this, between the two things (e. g. the Sun and the enamy)
peither inferiority nor superiority is intended to be expressed:88
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[IV 3 29
and therefore this is not Equal Pairing [where similarity with
a superior thing is meant to be indicated].
The only figure of speech left undefined is the same or
'Conformance': this is defined in the next ª.
29. When a certain thing becomes actually trans-
formed into that to which it is described as
being similar,--it is a or,
--it is a or, Conformance.
As for example, in the following verse, the creeper likened to
rvaśī actually becomes urvaśī on being touched by the King purūravas
(as described in the vikramośīyabhāye).
"The slender creeper having her leaves wetted with rain
appears like aft with her lips wet with tears; being dovoid of
flowers, it resembles who has removed her ornaments; there
being no bees humming along the creeper, it resembles a rapt in
anxious contemplation; thus taking all together the creeper appears
like my beloved ft who is now repentent over having rejected
my apologies to her when I was lying at her feet.
V
The figures described above may appear either individually or
conjointly when there is a conjunction of two or more of the
more important figures, we have what has been called 'wife or
* Commixture. This is what is defined in the next .
A
30. or 'Commixture' consists in the
of one figure of speech with another.
(
conjunction
31. Simile-Metaphor' and 'Fancy-Root' are the
two forms of 'Commixture.'
Example of 'Simile-Metaphor'-i. e. 'Metaphor based upon
Simile:-
Your operations being endless and independent. you are like
the Primeval Tortoise, being the very root of the creeper of the
Fourteen Worlds.
[Here the Metaphor contained in the phrase 'root of the
creeper of the worlds' is based upon the Simile contained in the
rest of the verse, between the King and the Tortoise-shaped taw.]V 1]
POETICAL CONVENTIONS
82
Similarly when the Moon is spoken of as 'the fe of the
Night-woman (where, on the Simile between the Night and the
Woman is based the Metaphor of the Moon and the fan,
+
32. The Fancy-Root' is that figure of speech which
forms the origin or source of the Fancy.
6
Example---
'The Moon kisses the face of the Night.-after having removed
(caught hold of) the darkness, which resembles the hair of the
woman, with his beams, which resemble the fingers of the man..
the face of Night having the lotus, which resembles the woman's
eyes,-closed (through modesty).'
'In the above section we have shown the various modifications
of Simile which contains within itself the endless beauties of com-
position and this we have done by means of definitions, some of
which are our own, while some are those propounded by others.
'There are many other points of beauty which form only parts
of the Figures of Speech; these also are similar to real Figures, and
should therefore be made use of by poets.
CHAPTER V.
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS.
Section (1).
POETICAL CONVENTIONS.
We proceed now with the 5th Chapter wherein we shall de-
scribe the 'Poetical Conventions,' and also, 'Word-Purism;' we
begin with the Poetical Conventions--
1. As a rule, one and the same word should not
be used twice.
As for example-such use as q- is reprehensible.
Some words however may be used twice: such, for example as 'ir'
12KAVYALAMKĀRA SUTRA
[V. 1. 2-
id the like. And also such usage as F-970: ; Gel-en; and
e like is allowable.
Conjunction between words in the same foot, as
also between the final letter of one foot and the
first letter of the following foot is absolutely
necessary, except in the case of the first half
and the second half (between the last letter of
the first half and the first letter of the second
half].
2. Just as in the case of a word, so in the case of
each foot of a verse,-as also between the final
and first letters of different feet-Conjunction is
absolutely necessary-except in the case of
first and second halves of the verse.
✔
As in the case of a word '-as laid down in the rule-Conjune-
on is absolutely necessary within the word, as also between the
refix and the verbal not.
$
3. The short syllable at the end of the foot is not
to be always regarded as long [except at the end
of the half-verse).
The final syllable of the foot is generally to be treated as long;
ut this should not be done in the case of all metres; this is to be
lone only in such metres as the following:...
yāsāṃ cālebhavati magṛhadehadīnāṃ
haṃsava sārasagaṇe vipūrvaḥ |
tāsvaiva pūrvabālikaṭayavāharāsa
bojāatiḥ patati kīṭamukhāyaṭīda: ||
[Formerly at my door-way, the grain-offerings use to be eaten,
up by swans and cranes; and now at the same places, where the
grains of the former offerings have sprouted out, handfuls of such
seed are falling as have been spoilt by insects '};--V 1 61
POETICAL CONVENTIONS
01
And the short syllable is not allowable at the foot-end of such
metres as
viruthinīnāṃ rajārī prasapati samastamāsīḍi nimīlitaṃ jagat |
[When the armies moved, the whole world became enveloped
in the dust raised by them. ']
The in the serves to indicate that the exception of the
preceding ...' except in the case of the first and second halves'...
is to be taken along with the present also.
4.
In prose, no metre should be introduced even
in its nearly complete form; except such
(irregular or unsymmetrical] metres as the
and the like which resemble prose.
The introduction, in the body of a prose composition, of such
sentences as happen to be in the form of a metrical verse, spoils
the beauty of the prose: and hence should be avoided. The feet
of the irregular metres however are so much like ordinary prose
that if a sentence happens to fulfil the conditions of such metres,
the effect of the prose is not lest.
5. Such words as e and the like should not be used
at the beginning of the feet.
The words intended to be precluded here are such as are
always incapable of fitting in with the opening of lines; such for
instance, as the word 'a' and the like; it does not apply to such
other words 'as '', and the like, which generally fit in with
the opening of verse-lines.
6. Neither half of the verse should contain a
syntactically incomplete sentence.
F
1
As in the following verse
jayanti tāṇḍave saṃbhorāṅgulikovyaḥ |
karārāḥ kṛṣṇasya ca bhujākrāṃśukapiśakhiyaḥ ||
['In dancing ever beautiful are the hands of f, with the
finger-ends slightly curved; and so also are the arms of pas
bright as the a bird.')KAVYALAMKĀRA SUTRA
tv 19
[Here the sentence contained in the first half has its nom-
native in the second half; this is not right.]
92
7. Such a compounds should not be used as are
capable of being taken as, and affording the
sense of, the gift compound.
+
For example the compound
rśva
fans should never be used
in the sense of the inhabited tree', which sense is obtained
by interpreting the compound as . This use would be
karmadhāraya.
undesirable, because the compound is more liable to be taken as
agant affording the sense of 'one who inhabits the tree.' [Such
use has to be avoided on the ground of confusion.]
8. The converse of the above also holds good.
That is to say, we should not use such gif compounds as
are more liable to be taken as far. For example, the com-
pound word frager should never be used in the sense of
one who
has brave servants ;' as the compound is more liable to be taken in
the sense of the brave man (ar); and so also the word
should not be used as if in the sense of 'one whose
voice is sweet, as it is more liabe to be taken as ferr in
the sense of the sweet voice."
6
9. Two negatives should be used, only when it is
intended to express the denial of a possible
negation.
That is to say, when it is intended to describe that a negation
or absence, which was possible, did not come about. For instance,
in the verse--
$
That person, by whom in battle, even the king of the gods
was not unconquered, is lying on the ground wounded by the arrows
of an ascetic
What is denied is the unconquering of which was possible
in the ordinary course of events; but which did not come about.
The qualification alone is to be used, when the
idea of what is qualified by it is well known.
10.V 1 13]
POETICAL CONVENTIONS
Example in the line-
The ocean-girded treasure-bearer'-
We have only two epithets of the Earth (which is too well
known to be mentioned]. Similarly also in the line-
'From out of the forehead of the angry Destroyer of Cities, fire
flashed forth-
[We have only the epithet 'destroyer of cities of land in
the line-
'Quickly did go rise from his seat, like the lightning bearer
from the mountain-top,'-[for the cloud we have only the epithet
"lightning-bearer."]
11. That which forms the subordinate member in
a compound is to be referred to by means of
the Pronoun.
As for example, in the line-
93
tavāpi nīlorapalapatracakṣuṣo mukhasya tadeṇusamānagandhinaḥ |
[You, who have your eyes like the blue lotus, and have your
face smelling like the pollen of that (blue lotus)']-
The 'blue lotus,' which forms the subordinate member in
compound in which it occurs, is referred to by the
the
pronoun 'fat,'
13. Of Vernacular forms of words only those should
be used that are very frequently used by poets.
For example, in the line-
yoṣidityābhalāṣa na hālām--
kī
[He did not desire the wine, thinking it to be a woman].
We have the Veruacular word 'rat' which is current among
poets. [Vide-a 49; figgway X 21 and I, 48.].
Those however that are not very current should never be
used; the word ''in the following line.
kaḍelīkāmanālīraviralavilamapalavā nartamayantaḥ |KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[V] 14
[Making to dance the gat forests, beaming with dense
fohage)-
used as the name of the wa trec, is not very common among
94
poets.
14. The gender of words and ellipses [made use of
should be only such as are accepted in current
usage].
For example, in the line,-
vatsemā bahu niśvasī: kuru surāgahameśa: 1
ľ
IO dear, do not heave such frequent sighs, just rinse your
mouth with one mouthful of wine.]-
The word ng has been used in the Masculine gender:
because it is in this from that the word is found to be mostly used;
and its feminine form is not used, even though the word is laid
down as belonging to that gender also.
And in the following verse,-
mā bhavantamanata: patrale vā
vāraṇo madakala; paraśurvā |
vāhinījalabhara; kutiśaṃ vā
svasti testu vatayā saha vṛkṣa ||
[O tree, may well betide thee I accompanied as thou art with
the creeper and may neither fire, nor wind, nor intoxicated
elephant, nor the axe,por the water of rivers, nor the thunderbolt
(hurt thee),'--
The verb ' stata' (hurt) is omitted, in vittue of the fact that
such elliptical omissions are current in usage.
1
15. Words used in their secondary sense should
also be only such as are current in usage (in
that sense).
For example only such words as-
wimation, pays
(a) at literally significs that which contains two r-s,' i.e.,
the word, *; hence the word
indicates the bee only
indirectly or secondarily.V 1 [7]
POETICAL CONVENTIONS
92
(b)
literally signifies the leg of the chariot e the
(wheel) and through this latter the word, varor is used to
indirectly indicate the ar bird.)
By the analogy of the word ft however the use of the word
in the sense of the crow, whose name is STF (a word with two
Ka-s), would not be justifiable: as such a word is not current in
usage.
16. In any single sentence many such words (in the
indirect sense) should not be used.
Because it is possible in the case of one word to treat it as
expressing what it does not really express; this is not possible in
the case of many words.
17. Such classes of things as the breast and the like
are generally spoken of in the dual number.
E. g.. 'targe, the two breasts of young women,' and
the like. Generally because in some cases other numbers are
also used, e. g. fimi: ('the eye of women ").
An objection is raised- "How can duality be said to belong
to the ma or class (as mentioned in the )? As a rule, number
belongs to the substance, and not to the class."
What the number really belongs to is known to the followers
of Jaimini (the t, who have devoted much time and
attention to a discussion of this question). As for ourselves, in
all matters relating to things of the world, we accept the view of
other people. Nor can this lead to any confusion; as all reasoning
is in accordance with the character of the thing described: [and
when this has been accepted to be in one form, all subsequent
reasoning will be in accordance with that form, and there will be
no confusion. This principle has to be borne in mind throughout
this work.96
KAVYALAMKĀRA SUTRA
[V. 2-1
Section (2).
CORRECT FORMS OF WORDS.
We proceed now to deal with the correct forms of words.
1.
compound has yet to be
Authority for the
found.
People generally use the word in the sense of : and
rudrāṇī. All such ekaśeṣa compounds are based upon the sūtra---pumānstriyā---
A word in the masculine gender, spoken along with the same
word, but ending with the feminine affix, becomes and
the latter is dropped' ( 1. 2. 67.); but this rule is not
applicable to the case of the compound formed of the words.
and off because the rule laid down in this aforesaid sutra is
governed by the proviso-' provided that the specific difference
between the two words be in their signs (affixes) only
(occuring in 1, 2, 65); and in view of this proviso, an
* compound of the kind in question is not allowable except
when the only difference between the two words lies in their
gender-ending; in the case of the two words and Tºft on the
other hand, we find that the words differ also in a point other
than the gender-endig: that is, in the word 's
denotes xnot only the femine gender, but also the fact that
the person called by that name is the wife of vt in accordance
with IV. 1.48, wherein it is laid down that in such words
as 'o' and the like, the feminine affix comes by virture
of the word expressing the name of a wife in relation to her
husband."
the feminine
d
#
The same difficulty also holds with regard to such ÜY
compounds as '' (r and garî),
'indra (in and indrāṇī), 'bhavau' (bhavaḥ and bhavānī), 'śarvo
(and stafft) and the like.
$
2. The character of the regular 'verbal root' belongs
to such roots as f (to touch), (to fear),
(to destroy) and the like; because the lists
mili
g
of roots are not meant to be exhaustive.V 2 4
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
We often meet with such verbs as 'f' (touches);' gad (fears
(destroys) and the like: and the question naturally alises
as to the character of these verbs; no such roots are found
enumerated in the lists provided by pāṇini in his gaṇapāṭha. In
answer to this it is declared that these may be regarded as regülar
roots; in as much as the enumeration in the several lists are not
meant to be final and exhaustive for we find grammarians
declaring that the number of roots goes on increasing.' Consequ-
ently all such roots as are found to be used by standard writers
must be accepted as regular roots,
NOTES. The root af was not included in the original 'list' of 'Phanantah
paramaipadinah' (Siddhantakaumudi pp. 359-362); but has been included in the
list by Bhoja Ibid. p. 361, I. 3).
The root
the list of qr
is actually found (f. . p. 392) as the seventy-third root in
roots beginning with 'obrashchu.' So it is not easy to see why
includes this root among the irregular ones.
The root kavi is not found in the si. phā~. at all.
3. The root af (to cover) is not necessarily always
en; this is indicated by the sutras them.
ātmanepadī
selves.
The root af ending in and having the accent, would
appear to be always see, in accordance with ¶. I. 3. 12; but
this restriction is not always strictly observed in usage; we find
it used as parasmaipakṣa also: e. g. lajjālolaṃ jalanti [ where valanti has the śatru
affix, peculiar to the T]. This looseness of usage is bome out
by the indications of
itself. How this is so is
explained in the next
pāṇini
4. (The indication mentioned in the preceding
is afforded by the fact that
supernumary syllables to
speak or declare.
it has added two
the root (to
The fact that the root 's' is er being shown by the
syllable ',' added to the root, where lay the necessity of adding the
further syllable ,' which also is indicative of the same fact? The
13KAVYALAMKĀRA ŠŪTra
[V 25
fact that two such syllables were needed in the case of the root which
is always strän¶ệt is 'indicative' of the view that those roots that
have only one of these se indicatory syllables are not to be
regarded as necessarily always. The same reasoning holds
with regard to the roots vāde, bharṭisa, sarji and the like all of which
we find used as Parasmaipadi in such words as 'āvedayati,' 'bhatsayāsa,
'af,' and so forth; in all these cases we must accept the
principle that the ',* indicated by the ultimate syllable ‘ş
and the get accent, is not always necessary.
↑
5. The form finust be taken as in the
or
Reflexive-passive [i. e. where one and the
same thing is the subject as well as the object
of the verb.]
The form eft can be accepted as correct only in cases where
its subject and object are both one and the same; as otherwise
the s from would be indefensible.
6. So also the form bhiyate.
The root does not belong to the fourth conjugation;
consequently, the form fà (with the intermediate 4) would be
possible only in the voice, and not in the ordinary Active
voice.
NOTE,The readings far and fand are both obviously wrong, as the
roots fear and far do belong to the fourth conjugation.
mārgi
7. The atmanepada use of the root f (to search)
must be regarded as wrong.
Among the roots of the tenth conjugation we find the root
(to search); among those roots of this class which take the
casual form only optionally, according to the vārtika-āvṛṣādā all
these roots being parasmaipadī, the ātmanepada use - e.g. mārgantāṃ dehabhāram-must
be regarded as wrong. We find standard writers making use of the
parasmaipada form of the root: c g. karakasayaṃ vā dhuvā vimārśati vāsasī,V 29]
8. Such forms as
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
99
and the like must be ex-
4²
plained as formed with the ag affix.
cānaśū
#
and
The forms Stan, àsqa (rolling) and the like, formed as they are
with the roots
both of which are could not be
taken as formed with the affix; as this is possible only in the
case of a roots. The only way therefore of explaining their
derivation is with the help of the affix
9. When the root in the sense of going takes the
causal form and the consequent. the subject
may be treated as accusative and also as non-
accusative (according to the sense of the root).
"
The root has been declared to signify going into which
acquiring also enters as the subordinate factor, and it has
also been declared to signify acquiring' into which 'going' enters
as the subordinate factor. In the former case, the root signifying
going is regarded as a fun and as such, when it takes the
causal form, its former subject becomes the accusative, in
accordance with T. I, 4, 52; as in the following line.-
dīrghikāsa kukhadāmi vikāsa lambhayanti śiśirāḥ śaśibhāsaḥ |
In the tanks. the cool rays of the moon make the lilies reach
the blossoming stage).
I Where we find the lilies, which are the 'subject' of the action
of reaching bloom, made accusative, when the root is used in the
causal form ].
But when the idea of 'acquiring' forms the predominant factor
in the denotation of the root of, the root cannot be regarded as
and hence in its causal form, its original subject is not
treated as accusative; as for instance, in the following verse
a
sitaṃ sitimnā sutarāṃ munarvapurvisāribhiḥ saughameivātha lammayan |
Kaakkomafkastigfa: ufatuat aracensgege: ||
apot addressed to the sage sweet words, enhancing the white
ness of his body by the light of his teeth, in the same mannerKÄVYALAMKĀRA SUTRA
[V 2 10
the whiteness of the whitewashed house is enhanced by the rays
of the moon
[Where is not treated as an Accusative.]
10. The words and must be regarded as irregular
forms (recognised by usage).
100
The words and in the sense of and respectively
must be regarded as irregular forms sanctioned by usage; e.g.
gà à ad aeg ( You have heard his words'] and
veśanadhīsa iti nāṣigataṃ purā me [" That he studies the Vedas was not
known to me."*]*
11. It is only through indirect or secondary indi-
cation by the sense of disappearance that the
word, fata can be used in the sense of insulted
and disgraced.
The word fat is frequently found to be used in the sense
of disgraced; e. g. ur fræga: ‘he has been disgraced by the king."
This sense however cannot rightly belong to the word, as it is only
in the sense of 'disappearance' that the particle face has been
declared (1. 1. 471) to be a m or Preposition, and it is only when
far is a preposition that the retention of the intermediate '#'in
can be justified, according to 7. 8-3-42, which lays down
that "the visarga of the afer or preposition is optionally changed
into #before a hard guttural or labial." Under the circumstances,
how is the use of fate in the sense of disgraced to be explained?
It cannot but be due to indirect indication by the sense of
disappearance, that is to say, the word literally primarily signifies
'hidden' or 'disappeared;' and this indicates 'disgraced," in view
of the fact that one who is disgraced is regarded to be as good as
program where are opgaver,
sajtogat. Nəhaya La, Ptas, tepatn
que alg W tragh.gith-rempty
*In these cases the word and cannot be regarded as geuitive under
7. 11. 3-67; as this lays down the use of the genitive only in connection with
such past participles as are used in the sense of the present. Because in the two
examples cited the sense of the present is absent,V 2.13]
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
disappeared. We also find the word used in its primary sense of
disappearance e g. lāvaṇyaprasaratiraskṛtāṅgalekhāṃ [She having the lines in
her body hidden by the charming glitter of her complexion."]
[01
12. The word (not-one) can be correct only when
taken as a ¶¶ compound under . II. 1-4.
In such setences as****
araṇyāmīssāya phalanamitanaikadrumamidam |
'This spot in the forest has got not a single tree full of fruits'—
We come across the compound word. If this were the
ordinary then the correct form would be according
to T. VI. 3,73,74 [by which the negative having become deleted,
its place is taken by al; as the negative without some sort of
an additional syllable, can never enter into any compound. The
only way then to justify the use of the word appears to be to
take it as the most general compound, under . II. 14 [by
which any subanta word may be compounded with another
subanta.]*
13. Such compounds as
and the like can be
explained only on the ground of the word fre
being included in the group of [irregular]
compounds.
We meet with the compound giữg in the following line :
madhupipāsumadhuvratasevitaṃ mukulajālamajṛmbhata vīrudhām |
[There came into view the blossoms of creepers, with the
honey-thirsty bees hovering round them];
and this compound I belonging to the Accusative-
satpuruṣa expounded as madhu pipāsu can be explained only in accordance
with the art on II 1:24, which points out the possibility of
such Accusative compounds being formed with the words
contained in the
group.
* It is not made clear how this meets the difficulty urged in the preceding
ma
clause; the incapability of the simple negative particle to enter into a compound
should bar on the compound also.KAVYALAMKĀRA SUTRA
[V 24
NorB-There is no such group in Panini's gaṇapāṭha, On the bārtika the tasvabodhinī
Commentary remarks.
"What words form this group can be ascertained only from usage.
102
a
14. The word, can be regarded as correct only
when it is a Proper Name.
Because such a compound is admissible only in the case of
proper names; as declared in T. II. 150, by which, “the words
expressing the points of the compass or a number enter into com-
position with words correlated to them by being in the same case,
when the sense of the compound is that of an appellative."
15. The word can be right only if taken as an
Elliptical Compound.
Such expressions as fraret: frà cannot be quite correct because
the proper form of the compound should be arute by 41. II. 1.56.
The only way of justifying the compound fare under the circum-
stances, is to take it as an Elliptical Compound, there being an
elision of a word in the middle, on the analogy of such compounds
as mruña and the like, declared as correct by the ar under
#. II. 1.60, [when expounded as fug: qnia: the word for being
elided in the compounded forml; the compound fare should, in
this case, be expounded as : : 'the lip of the shape of
the bimba fruit,' the word at being elided. The same
explanation would apply to such other compounds as frais and
the like. It may be noted however that the above explanation
should be had recourse to only in the case of compounds used
by standard writers: and should not form a rule for the making of
endless new compounds of the like kind.
geen
16. The compounds and the like are to be
explained like the compound fe€ ¶g:.
angsuren, and
That is to say, such compounds as an
the like must be treated as belonging to the group, all of
which are regarded as irregular but recognised
compounds byV 2 19]
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
103
pā, 11, 1,72; the compound being expounded as lokamiva lokam -
ongé a agìd ◄ [' fickle from the very root.']*
17.
In such words as ¶ and the like, there is no
absolute interdict upon their being treated
as Genitive ; because the ordinal number
takes an additional nominal affix.
&
Such compounds as 'e' and the like are not
absolutely incapable of being taken as the Genitive-; because
the ordinal number, ¶ (sixth) really stands for the sixth
part', being formed by the addition of the further nominal affix *ra
denoting part' [which does not effect any change in the form of the
word] according to ¶. V. 3,48 and 50, by which-" after an ordinal
number ending in f, and also the ordinal numbers and Me
comes the affix w when a part is a meant."
18. In the case of the words
#
and the like; the
Genitive is interdicted by the fact of the
second member being an abstract noun denot-
ing quality.
.com-
II, 2,11 lays an interdict upon the genitive
pounds of which the second member is an abstract noun denoting
quality: hence no such compounds should be formed as Trifter
('leaf-paleness'). Thôn¶yim ('yellowness of the cluster of leaves")
and the like. Therefore wherever we meet with such compounds
we must regard them as cases of wanton disregard of the aforesaid
interdict.
19. A non-appositional Bahuvrihi Compound is allow-
able when the second factor consists of the word
and the like.
Though the compounds herein mentioned do not actually appear in the
gyrjes Group as given in the quars yet they are held to be included therein
in view of the fact that for has declared this group to be 30 ākṛtigaṇa,
by virtue of which, the fact of any word belonging to this group is acertained by
its form a posteriori, and is not discoverable a priort by any consideration of its
constituent parts,104
KAVYALAMKARA Sutra
[V 2.20
As a rule, in all Bahuvrihi compounds, the two factors should
be in the same case, but when the second factor happens to be
some such word as and the like, the compounding of words in
different cases (i.e. non-appositional) is not objectionable. F.g.
śāstrārtha hi vivekalābhaḥ [where śāstrārthajanmā means śāstrārthāt janma yasya 'that
discriminative wisdom which is born of the study of the Scriptures;"
one word being in the ablative and the other in the nominative
case; and similarly
in the sense #: breaths
located in the throat', where one word is in the locative while the
other is in the nominative case.]
20. hastāgram and agrahasta – both forms of the compound are
right in view of the fact that the quality and the
thing qualified may be regarded as different as
well as non-different.
We meet with the word wat and also TEAM: and again with
the words grqtur and sugg; and the question is, how to account
for such usage ? Both forms cannot be correct, the compounds not
being included in the simſ group,' in whose case the order of the
component words is optional, by . I1, 2, 37; under the circums-
tances, if we were to include the compounds in question under
that group, by regarding the group as far, then there would be
no fixity with regard to the order of words in any compound [ any
and every compound being included under this group]. The only
way by which such usage may be explained lies in the fact that the
quality and the qualified may be regarded as different as well as
non-different; when they are different, we have the forms a
and gq [the compound being Genetive-arg]; and when the
two are non-different, we have the forms: and sug [the
compounds being karmadhāraya,
21. In the matter of the Sequence of Words in a
compound, vulgarisms have to be accepted as
correct.
We find people making use of the form as well as
qua; no regard being had to the proper sequence of the words
compounded; in this matter, when we find that a certain `irregu-V 2 23]
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
105
larity is current in usage, we have to admit it; but this does not
mean that the analogy of these vulgarisms is to be extended to all
words.
22. Even when the sense of the objective is denoted
by an indeclinable, the object does not take
the accusative ending; the enumeration of the
agencies expressive of the accusative being
purely suggestive.
0
In wº II, 3, 1 and 2, we read-"the accusative ending is added
to words only when the objective character is not expressed,
either by a conjugational affix, or by a primary or verbal effix, or by a
secondary or nominal affix, or by a compound." But the enumeration
of the agencies of denotation in this last clause is not meant to be
exhaustive: consequently, even when the sense of the objective is
denoted by indeclinables, we find the object not taking the accusa-
tive ending; e g. in the line-
fa¶gììsfîì éqî ei ògyaigan |
I'It is not proper to cut even a poison-tree that one has himself
grown'],-the sense of the objective being denoted by the indeclin-
able tax, we find that the real object of the verb-a-does not
take the accusative ending. Similarly also in the sentence
& fà à we have a with the first case-ending, because the
sense of the objective is denoted by the indeclinable f.
★
23. The word
(capable of being done) retains
the same form, even when what is the object
(of that capability) is of a different gender and
number; because the expression of the objective
is mentioned only in a general (unspecified)
way.
The word
is formed of the root
by ¶rº III, i. 99; the word retains this
14
and the passive affix
neuter singular formKAVYALAMKARA Sutra
[V 2 23
urespective of the Gender and Number of the object that is spoken
of as * and the reason for this lies in the fact that in connection
with the in question, we do not find any specifications with
regard to the form in which the objective (of ) has to be ex-
pressed. As for exemple, in the verse,
106
śakyamopadhipatemaṃtrodayā: karṇapūraracanākṛte tava |
apragalbhagavamacikomalāichettu mamanasvasaṃpuḍhaiḥ karāḥ ||
[For the making of thy ear-ornament, the rays of the newly-
risen moon, which are soft as the fresh shoots of barley corn, are
capable of being cut off with the nails ]-we find the word vr,
even though that which is described as is T (moon's rays),-
which word is in the Masculine gender and plural number. For
what is stated in this is based upon the authority of the
following declaration of the author of the mahābhāṣya-- śakyaṃ ca māṃsādi-
bhirapi prahantum ----
[Hunger can be allayed even by such things as dog's flesh '],
[where the form is retained even though what is described
as I is which is a word in the Feminine gender ].
It is not, however, necessary that the word should never
agree in gender and number, with what is ; hence we have
such sentences also as-
śakyā bhaktuṃ jhaṭiti cisinīkandavacandrapākṣaḥ |
[*The moonbeams, soft as the lotus-stalk, can be quickly
broken to pieces. 'l-
I where we have the form in agreement with the
Masculine Plural of the pādāḥ |
24.
Like 'deficiency,' the 'excess also of limbs
constitutes the bodily defect' [by virtue ofCORRECT FORM OF WORDS
which the third case ending is employed by
pā II. 3. 20].
V 2 271
07
For instance, just as we have
: (where the deficiency
of one eye is meant), so also we have a fa: (where the
excess of an eye is meant).
25. The compound F is not right; because the
singular number would be the correct form.
In the line-
āyuṣaḥ kṛmikīṭānsamalaṃkaraṇamalpatā |
'For the span of life of insects. shortness is an ornament."
The form eruy (plural) is not right; because the proper
number for such a compound should be the singular, by qº II. 4. 8.
according to which, "A compound of words signifying
small animals is Singular." Nor can the compound be taken as
elliptical; as it is not open to all compounds to be regarded as
such.
26. The form is not right, because of the
mention of the form TY,
In the phrase augy and jara l' those people who are carried
by mules and camels'], we find the form agy, which is not correct;
because it paṇini's gaṇapāṭha under sūtra II, 4-11, under the gavāba group.
we find the compound in the form g
27. The form ; must be the second preterite form
of the root (to go, to shine, and to hold).
In the line-
lāvaṇyamutpātha ivāṃsa yatnaḥ |
There was a special effort in the producing of the requisite
beauty.KAVYAI AMKARA SUTRA
[V 2 28
We find the word a this cannot be the second preterite form
of the root (to be); as this root in that preterite, takes the form
of the root '' (by ¶rº II—4-52); therefore it must be taken as the
second preterite form of the root * (Lo go, &c.).
108
28. The form ga is derived from the root adhū
(to fight) with the affix.
In the line-
yo bhartṛpiṇḍasya kṛte na yudhyet |
['One who would not fight in consideration of the livelihood
he receives from his master"],
yudhyet parasmaipada
the form in the appears to be wrong, the root
Ty qÀge
being an root. It may, however, be justified as being
the potential form of the root along with the affix
meaning of the word ge thus being 'would wish to have upon
himself fighting. [The addition of the affix makes the
form possible.]
,-the
29. In such words as far and the rest, we have to
seek for an authority for the use of the
affix.
or
In the clause – viralāyamānamalayamārute [' the wind
mountains being scarce']-we find the word
is possible only by the presence of the affix
these however is possible; because by r III. 1-12, the
can be added only to those words that appear in the
and in the
affix
group:
we do not find the word
in that group;
then as regards the
affix, this can be added only to those words
that appear in the
group, by T III, 1-13; and the word
fe is not found in the 3; in this latter group either. For
these reasons, an authority
hunted out.
for such usage has still to be
from the madhya
; such a form
; neither ofV 2.33]
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
109
30. The root (to kill) takes the causal affix (4)
even when the sense of the causal is absent;
and this is due to the fact of the root belonging
to the tenth conjugation also.
with
In the phrase raftaar getrend; we find the word qafar used
in the sense of having killed', in which the sense of the causal is
entirely absent: and yet the word is formed of the root
the causal for [ without which the form would have been simply
hatvā . This must be due to the fact that all roots meaning to kill
are mentioned among the roots of the tenth conjugation [which
take the causal affix nominally, without involving the sense of the
causal.]
31. The form is justified by the fact of the root
(which enters into the formation of the word)
being mentioned with an indicatory ultimate.
In the sentence anucarī priyatamā mālasā Dear madālasā is a maid-
servant' we have the word gf where we find no reason for
the final long except the fact that among the Ta group of roots
enunciated in the r we find the root mentioned with an
indicatory which makes the root a fea which makes the feminine
possible, by To IV. 1. 15].
is formed by the root * with
32. The form
the affix .
4
(to
In the phrase kesarālaṃ śilīnbama we find the word kesarālam this word
can be rightly explained only as meaning a Holà ( 'that which
adorns the mien");-the word being formed with the root
adorn, to suffice and to check) and the affix
according to which the
a noun in the accusative
by To III. 2. 1,
affix is added to a root preceded by
És
case.
33. The word
must be derived from the root
(to take or hold) with the affx T.110
KĀVYĀLAMKĀRA SUTRA
In the line-
patralaṃ vanamidaṃ virājate.
"This forest full of foliage looks beautiful :-
we find the word 4 this word must be explained etymolo-
gically as in that which holds or contains foliage; and as such
it must be derived from the root T (to hold), preceded by the word
in the Accusative case, and thereby taking the affix in accord-
ance with To III. 2-3.
[ V. 2, 34-
n
34. Such words as and the like must be explain-
ed on the analogy of the word mūlabibhuja.
That is to say, the words #, f and the like must be
etymologically explained as tf, et-and root to hold-
affix; the presence of the affix being explained in the same way
as in the words included under the g group mentioned in
the TTB in connection with To III. 2. 5.
-
35. Such words as afer ('destroyer of enemies') and
the like must be regarded as incorrect; because
the possibility of the root (to destroy) taking
the affix is restricted within strict limits.
can take the & affix
consequently
and
III. 2. 87 lays down that the root
only when it is preceded by the words
such words as after figer and the like [which could be formed only
with the root g and the affix ] must be rejected as wrong.
The restriction laid down in the is fourfold: (1) The root
(takes the only when preceded by the words,
root alone that takes the when preceded
(3) 'when preceded by those words, the root
only'; and (4) 'it is only in the sense of the past that the root
takes the when preceded by those words; and the only way
affix
to justify the words appears to be to accept them as fulfilling any one
&c.—(2) it is the
by those words;
takes theV 2.381
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
HI
only of these four restrictions [thus the words in question satisfy all
the conditions except the first; in reality however all the four
conditions have to be satisfied],
36. Such words as and the like must be explain-
ed as compounds formed with verbal-nouns
(nouns formed by verbal roots with primary
or verbal affixes),
Such words as brahmavid vṛtrabhid and the like cannot be rightly
explained as
and ti fa respectively; because we have
seen that Tº III, 2. 87, lays down that 'when preceded with the
words and it is only the root that can take the q
affix' Such words, therefore, must be explained as compounds
formed with a verbal noun as one of the members; that is to say,
the etymological explanation must be as follows, brahmavid : vetti iti vid
knower [root biṃdu to know affix kipa by para III. 2.76]; brahmaṇaḥ (of bahman)
( knower), Similarly vṛtrabhidaḥ bhinatti iti bhid destroyer [root mid to
destroy, affix kie by pā 111. 2,76]; trasya (of vṛtta) bhida (destroyer), In
both cases we have the Genitive a Compound-(a) between
and the verbal noun fe and (b) between and the verbal
noun fiz.
37. The above explanation applies also to such words
as and the like.
That is to say, the word He should be explained in the same
manner :- : upholder [root affix): #: (of the Earth)
:(upholder),-a Genitive ag
verbal noun , Similarly with
compound between t and the
and such other words.
38. Such words as f and the like have the force of
the reflexive as well as of the active.
We come across such expressions as-(a) figi m (the piece
of wood capable of being pierced); (b) fizi an; (piercing darkness);112
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[V 2 39
(c) timiramipura vyomna śuṅgam [the uppermost portions of the sky are
capable of being pierced by darkness]; (d) foga: [the day of
piercing heat]; (e) ft i [love is capable of being destroyed
by jealousy]; (f) ªş fifà: [love capable of being destroyed]:
( 9 ) mātaṅgaṃ mānabhaṅgaram [the elephant destructive of pride ]. Here we
find that while in (a), (c), (e), and (f) the words with the
have the force of the reflexive passive, in (b), (d) and (g) they have
the force of the active; and this promiscuous use is based upon the
rule kamakatari cāyamipyate - 'this affix, quracū, is used also in the reflexive
passive sense, where the implication of the particle (also")
is that the affix is used in the active sense also.
affix
39. Such words as : and the like are of doubt-
ful correctness,
Because, in all such cases the root should take the way affix
I which would give the form fr], and not ar (which gives the
form f), by ° III. 3. 33, by which-"the root with the
preposition f must take when extent is intended to be express-
ed, except when the extent meant to be expressed is that of
something relating to words."
40. The lengthening of the penultimate short vowels
of the word and the shortening of the
penultimate long vowel of the word
must
be regarded as belonging to the usage of
ignoramuses.
Some people use the abstract noun formed of the root with
the preposition in the form of a (with the penultimate vowel
lengthened),-making use of such expressions as
coming or advent
are the
of the ': this is not correct; because
the root in forming its abstract noun takes the affix are [which
gives the shortened form and not the affix which alone can
give the lengthened form 3]. Similarly, some people use the
abstract noun formed from the root with the preposition inCORRECT FORM OF WORDS
113
the form
(with the penultimate vowel shortened, as if the
),-making use of such expressions as
affix used were
DY
the picking of flowers'; this also is not correct; because the
abstract affix added to the root should be a (which gives the
lengthened form waar by r III. 3. 40, by which is added to
the root when used in the sense of picking up with the hand,
except when the idea of stealing is meant to be conveyed.")
V 2 42]
--
41. The word is an irregular word accepted
(in usage).
The word is accepted as correct. It is derived from the
root to which the affix is added in virtue of the fact that,
the root belongs to the 'Bhidadi' group of roots,-this being a
group inclusion wherein is ascertained a posteriori; so far the forma-
tion of the word is quite regular; the only irregularity that comes
in is in the change of the vowel in into -such change being
interdicted in the case of the affix ; and on this point the word is
regarded as ¶a i.e., an irregularly-formed word accepted as
correct and the authority for this lies in the usage of
in the age where we meet with the words
himself
the roots
and denote beauty,'-where we find the word H. As to
whether the word in the cātupāṭha is śobhā or śobha we cannot be sure,
except through what is taught to us by our teachers.
42.
In the matter of the addition of to noun-bases
ending in long consonants, there is much
freedom of option as to the feminine form
of such words.
111. 3. 103 lays down the addition of an ar to bases ending
in long consonants whereby the words assume the feminine form;
but in this matter there is much freedom of option; so that (a) in
the case of some words, the feminine form is regarded as essential,
-e.g,, in the words 1, 591 and the like; (b) in some it is not
regarded as at all essential, e q., in the word ; (c) in some
cases the feminine form is entirely optional,-e g., we have both
Fier and aft, #161 and 716:
+
15114
[V 2,43
and the like, the past
participal affix has the force of the active;
and this is due to the word (in the dealing
with the use of the affix with such roots).
KAVYALAMKARA ŠŪTRA
43. In such words as
In the words qafua, qfarga and the like,-even though the
affix is directly mentioned, in q-III, 4. 72, as to be added in
the abstract and passive sense, yet the affix is added in the active
sense; and this is in virtue of the particle in the [which
implies that the affix in the case of the roots specified, has the
sense of the abstract and the passive also]. If the were meant
only for the purpose of indicating that the word wat: of a
previous has to be construed with the sūtra in question, then,
sūtra
in that case, we should have to repeat the particle (in order to
show that the affix has the sense of the active also).
āha
44. (says), in reality the present tense form of
root, is used in the past tense because of its
mistaken similarity to some other verbs in the
past tense.
quaqua
9
In the first Five forms (the singular, dual and plural of the
third person, and the singular and dual of the second person) of the
present tense, the root to speak, takes the alternative forms of
and the rest, in accordance with q° III. 4-84; but the word are
is often found to be used in the sense of the past-i, e., SITE WIATR
'thus said the blessed Lord himself'; this use must be due
to people mistaking the form to be of the past tense; this
misconception arising from the resemblance of this word to verbs
in that tense. Standard writers, however, always observe the
difference, using it always in the Present; i. c., se ta kanyti
H [where the has been added in order to indicate the
past tensel. [Such use of is common among standard writers];
and we are inclined to think that in the sentence.-
anukaroti bhagavato nārāyaṇasya [Resembles nārāyaṇa ] the poet did insert
the to indicate the past; and it must have been dropped by the
mistake of copyists.CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
In the case of such adjectives as
(variegated)
and the like, the feminine affıx ™ (³) is not
applicable.
In the following lines-
V 2 46]
45
upaśrotaḥ svasthasthitamahipaśṛṅgāyaśavalāḥ |
varaîai gar: ggitalacgitazga: |
[15]
["The banks of rivulets with joyous birds flitting about become
variegated with the horn-tips of buffaloes quietly seated along the
flowing water."],
and-
bhramarotkarakalmāṣāḥ kusumānāṃ samṛddhayaḥ |
["The beauty of flowers is variegated with hosts of black
bees'],
We find two feminine adjectives and both ending
in (the feminine affix g);this however is not right; because in
such adjectives , tq, would have been the night feminine affix, by
¶° IV. 1'40, according to which-"the affix ft is employed in the
feminine of every word expressive of colour and ending with an
accent, and having no ♬ as penultimate," Consequently qqa
and at would be the corresponding correct forms.
46. As qualifying a living being the form t ('blue')
is doubtful.
In the line-
kuvalaghadanīlā kokilā bālacūte |
['The lotus-blue cuckoo is seated on the young mango-
tree'],-
We find the adjective ; this is not correct; it would be
the correct form; because by IV. 1-42, read along with the
an upon the
arrête
the feminine of ft
we get at the rule that-" is added in forming
when an animal is meant to be qualified by it,”116
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
V 2.47
47. There is much option on the point of a certain
noun-base being regarded or not as belonging
to the human genus,
We have the following two Sutras bearing on the feminine affix
to be added to words denoting the human genus,-(1) The
feminine alfix comes after a nominal stem ending in short
denoting the human genus" (IV. 1-56); and (2) "after a nominal
stem ending in short not having the letter as its penultimate,
and being expressive of the human genus, the affix in the feminine
is" (IV. 1-66). The actual application of these Sutras however
depends on the option of the speaker, which option is ascertal-
nable by actual usage, whether or not a certain nominal stem
will be regarded as 'denoting the human genus'. For example, in
the following verse-
mandarasya madirākṣi pārśvato niśanābhi na bhavanti nitragāḥ |
vāṭa vāsukivikarṣaṇodbhavā bhāminīda padavī vibhāvyate ||
[O beautiful girl with soul-ravishing eyes and deep navel'
what you see along the sides of the mountain are not rivers :
they are only the marks left by the rubbing of the vāsukī.] --
44
We find the word f and fun which are the vocative
forms of the words ff and at formed by the addition of the
feminine affix in accordance with the above-mentioned
IV. 1-65; the shortening in the vocative of the final long (of the
feminine) being due to º VII. 3-107, by which a short vowel is
substituted in the Vocative Singular for the long vowel of the
words called i (i, e. word-forms ending in long and and being
names of females)." If a further were added to the word fi
according to the rules agra - then the feminine form would
itava āṣyaṅgāt
be fasafar. The above is a case where the nominal stems frit
and færft are regarded as 'denoting human genus.'
On the other hand, in the following verse,
maint
hṛtoṣṭharāgairnayanodavindubhirnibhamanāmenipatadviraṅgitam ||
cyutaṃ ruṣā bhinnagaterasaṃśayaṃ śukodaraśyāmamidaṃ stanāṃśuka ||V 2. 48)
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
117
[This is without doubt the green cloth covering the breasts of
my deep-navelled beloved, marked with the drops of tears falling
rom her eyes and depriving her lips of their colour'].-
We find the word
: which is the singular-genitive form
of the feminine word fan with the short final vowel, the long
feminine being precluded by the fact that the nominal stem is
not regarded as denoting the human genus?"
Similarly in the line-
Pedag
sutanu jahihikopama.
['O beautiful one, give up thy anger'],-
We have the word as the vocative form of the feminine word
gaz which has its final lengthened by the second mentioned
above, which is applicable in view of the fact that the word is
regarded as ' denoting the human genus'; and the shortening of the
final vowel in the vocative is by r VII. 3. 107 mentioned above.
On the other hand, in the line.-
varatanurathanāso naiva dṛṣṭā svayā me |
['Or, that beautiful one has not been seen by you'l-
sav----
We have the feminine word : in which the final is not
lengthened, because the word is not regarded as 'denoting the
human genus.'
48. The long as a feminine affix is added to words
ending in the long also.
qº IV. 1. 66 lays down that the feminine affix is to be added
to words ending in the short ; but words with the long also
take the feminine affix; and that this is allowable is shown by
the usage of the Teachers themselves; for instance, in connection
with the aim on the such words as
(both ending
and
in the long ) have been cited as examples. It is in accordance
with this that we have the word gg (in the vocative) in the sentence
Tà¥à¶ (O beautiful-browed one! what is the necessity for118
KA YALAMKARA SUTRA
IV 2 48
hurry) this form ay is possible only as the Vocative form of the
nom.nal stem (with an additional appended as the feminine
affix) [in which case alone the stem cauld be declined in the
vocative like the word ]; if the additional long were not
appended, then the vocative form would not be possible [the
word being declined in that case like the stemy itself, whose
vocative forms are like that of the stein ; and th. vocative form
would be
N
49. The form : [is not right]; as the addition
of the affix is irresistible [and this affix
does not give the said form.]
In the clause faster avena ('the autumnal wind'] the word
: is not right; because in the sense of belonging or
pertaining to, all words denoting time take the affix 3 (πº IV.
3.11) [and with this affix, the form should be tha:)
50. So also in the word gra
People speak of the mat ag: ('nocturnal darkness'); and here
also the word is incorrect; as being a word denoting time.
the word at should, by ¶ IV. 3. 11, take the affix a which
would give the form śārvarikama.
51. ara
The word may be regarded as correct, on
the ground of usage.
We meet with such: phrases as a safa: ("light eternal'); and
the forma also is not grammatically correct; because, being a
as to wh
* Without the feminine affix the word which is formed with the root
and the affix would not come under the TT 1 2, 48; and thus there would
be no authority for the shortening of the final vowel, which shortening, by the
comes about only in the case of words with feminine affixes, and the affix
is not a feminine affix. The appending of the additional as a feminine affix
Lrings the word under the 1. 2. 48, whereby the shortening becomes
possible, It is to be noted however that later grammarians are not satisfied with
this explanation: though the word subhrū is met with in the bhaṭṭikāvya-hā pitaḥ kāsi de
sutru and kālidāsa vimānanā supiturgṛhe kṛtaḥ, but the siddhānta and the tatvabodhinī
both regard the use to be HTC or mistaken'.
THV 2 53]
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
115
word denot ng time the word ar should take the affix ** which
would give the form which in fact s the form adopted by
qhimselt in his II. 4. 9. But the use of the word is
very common; c.g. ªªà gìàòq;*
the word may be accepted as correct.
And on the strength of this usage
52. The words
and the like can be correct only
when taken as formed with the affix 7 in the
sense of fit IL,
Such words as rājyavaṃśya, sūryavaṃjaya and the like can be correct only
when formed with the aflix (a) in the sense of fit or capable or
excellent, in accordance with gr IV. 4.99. If the T affix were
the one that denotes 'origin' or 'habitation,' then, even though
such an affix would be admissible (hy qr IV. 54) in view of the
fact that the word à appears in the group mentioned in that
as taking the aflix-yet the addition of such an affix being
indicated in the case of words (compounds) ending in the word
at the formation of the word by the addition of that affix would be
objectionable.
53. The word is wrongly used.
The word in such expressions as até 4179 (wooden vessel")
is wrong. Because the adjective (in the sense of product of ar) is
to be always formed with the affix
tyle
in accordance with yº IV,
3. 144, by which-"the affix comes in the sense of product
invariably alter ge words i. e. words with a long vowel)."
In support of the form a it might be argued that the affix
a has the sense of product and part; while what the word grTA
means is pertaining or belonging to wood [which sense is afforded
by the allix ]; [and as such the sense being entirely different,
per a man
* If Vamana was prepared to accept the authority of usage in this case
we fail to see why he should not have done so, in the preceding sutra. We
have the usage of Kalidasa in support of the formeg., the line
sarvarasyatamaso nivṛttaye17
120
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
[V 2 54
the rule laying down the former cannot set aside the latter.]
But this reasoning also will not be right; because in the sense of
pertaining or belonging to the affix admissible in the case of ga
words is (and not ), according to rº IV. 2. 144 [and with
the form of the word would be dāvīya and not dāravaḥ.]
54. In the case of such words as gift and the
like, authority for the addition of the a
affix has to be found (is not available.)
55. The formation of such words as aupamya sāṃnidhya and
the like has to be explained like that of the
word cāturvarṇya
Just as the word
is formed of the word agavi with the
affix in the reflexive sense, in accordance with the man on 9°
V.I.124; so the words aupampa, sāṃnidhya &c. also.
56. In view of the affix being a fa [i e. in which
the is a supernumerary meant to be dropped],
words formed with this affix, in many cases,
take an additional long .
The affix that comes in by ¶° V. 1. 124, is one of those
affixes that contain a supornumerary and by virtue of this
character, it takes an additional long in many cases; but not in
the case of such words as
and the like
57. In the case of the words and the like,
the addition of the long is optional.
So that we have both amaz araît and grey add it.
58. The word
[one who has the bow,] is correct,
by reason of the word dhanva occurring in the Ponyādi
group.
By virtue of which the possessive affix f being added to the
word (V. 2. 115 and 116), we get the form f.
4
C
★CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
12
The word can be explained only as
formed with the fu affix.
In the line-
V 2.59
59
babhūva tasyā śraturasraśobhi vapurvibhakta navayojanena | ( kumāra 1-32 )
[Her completely beautiful body was beautified by fresh
youth"],-
in appears objectionable; even though the
occurs in the ef group [which take the possessive
taking the
not
word
V. 2, 115 and 116], and as such is capable of
affix,-yet as in the present instance the word is
I pure and simple, but a compound word ending with the
, the does not apply in this case [as declared in ÊCHIAT
31] Even granting the application of the to the compounded
word in question,-inasmuch as the word is a
it cannot take the possessive affix s; as for the purpose of express-
ing the presence of the quality whose 'possession' would be
denoted by the possessive affix, it would be a very much simpler
method to make the word a
compound,
The word
word
affix, by
compound [having the form
expounded as
]; thus then, there being no
possibility of the possessive affix , how could we have the word
caturasraśobhi ?
The declares that the only way open to us for explaining
the word is to take it as formed with the verbal or primary affix
for which denotes habit or constancy-the word being explained
as IJÀ ÑÌHÀ Ç'that which is constantly beautiful in all its parts".
Granting the possibility of the above explanation in the case
of the word agrumſ, we again ask-How to explain the word
anumeyaśobhi (which is also used by kālidāsa in his kumārasaṃbhava 1 37)?
The aforesaid explanation is not possible in this case.
,
The only explanation possible is to take the word af as
formed by the root with the affix -either in the sense
of 'excellent action' by the art on r III. 2. 78. or in that
of 'necessity' by ¶r III. 2. 80,—and then with the abstract affix ♬a
tacked on to it; after which the word (having taken the form of
1622
KAVYALAVKARA SUTRA
IV 2 60
śobhitvam, would form a cahuvrīhi compound with the word anumeya: the
compound anumeyaśobhi being thus expounded as anumeya śobhitvaṃ yasya
['whose excellent beauty is to be inferred'). The absence of
he abstract affix is due to the fact that the abstract quality
ma is already implied in the adjective ; just as we
have in the case of such sentences as-(a) Aug [where
nirākulam tiṣṭhati
nirākulam is equivalent to nirgataṃ ākulatrayasmin karmaṇi tad yathā svān tathā, the
abstract affix being dropped in the compounded form ]; and (b)
sadhīrasuvāca [where sadhīram is equivalent to cīratvena sahitam the abstract
affix being dropped in this compounded form. ]
: must be taken as formed with
60. The form
the
In the line-
affix.
jīvanti rājamahiṣīmanu kañcukīyāḥ |
[Women clad in jackets attend upon the Queen'],-
We find the word-How to explain the formation of
this word? In such cases, the affix commonly used is the ''
denoting possession; but this is not possible in the case of the word
(which forms the stem of the word in question). The only
explanation possible is to take it as formed with the affix 119,
which denotes 'desiring for self, the meaning of the word being
'those who desire the jacket for themselves,'
61. The comparative affixes [ and the rest are
used also when one member of the comparison
(i. e. that to which the thing in question is
compared) is only in the mind of the speaker
[and is not directly expressed].
As for instance, in such phrases as qªat ¤; ('denser darkness")
qgzat îş (much more love), and the like.
62. Such words as [] and the like must be
taken as formed with the affix and drop-
ping one of their component letters.V 2 65]
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
That is to say, the word te is formed by the word
with the affix in the sense either of fifa (wisdom) or of
(sympathy)-by V. 3-79; and has the letter dropped in
accordance with ar V. 3. 83, by which-" when there follows an
affix beginning with a vowel, from among those mentioned in the
present section, there is elison of all that portion of the name of a
human being which comes after the second vowel." [In the case
in question, we have it, the name of a human being; and when
to this is added the affixe which begins with a vowel, there is
elision of which is the only letter that comes after the in f
which forms the second vowel in the name]. In the same manner,
the word af is formed by the word af with the above-
mentioned.affix e having its last' letter 'e' dropped.
63. The word is due to the fact of the work
muktā occurring in the vinayādi group.
123
a
group of
The word f is formed by the word with the affix 3
with the reflexive sense; the application of this affix being in
view of the fact of the word occurring in the fa
words, which take the reflexive affix by ° V. 4-34. The
neuter gender of the word in face of the feminine gender of
its primary is due to the fact that the gender and number of
words formed with reflexive affixes differ from those of their
primaries.
64. The words and the like must be due to the
fact of [their primaries] being included in the
group of words.
tarife
The words included in the wife group take the reflexive affix
aṇūṃṃ by pā° V. 4-38; and it is because the words pratibhā vikṛti and
are included in that group that they take the reflexive
which gives rise to such words as fàng
respectively.
- vaikṛtam and dvaitama
65. There can be no such word as except
as an
compound,
an
+124
In the line
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
madhu sarajasaṃ madhyepa pibanti śilīmukhāḥ |
"The black bees drink the honey mixed up with pollen,
within the lotus"],
we find the word
is not correct; because the
as an u compound.
avyayībhāva
66. The form a
[V 2 66
; this use of the word as an adjective
word can be correct only when taken
cannot be right, except when
[its base is] a proper name.
In the phrase-gauzi sifarfon ('the brave man wielding the
bow'l-we find the word gaug: this cannot be correct except when
the ward is taken as the locative form of agy regarded as a name;
because by V. 4-132, "all if compounds ending with the
word v take an additional are at the end." [So the compound
word should be vṛtadhanvan of which the locative form would be ghṛtadhanvaniḥ
but in the case of such compounds forming a proper name, the
addition of the sp is optional, by ¶° V. 4-133; (and hence the
form gay and its locative form avgit may be correct only
when taken as a proper namel.
67. In the word if the final & cannot be got at (by
any right method).
In such clauses as gifer; : ('evil-smelling body') we find
the word ga containing an at the end of the compound; but
the presence of this in the compound in question cannot be
justified; because, by 7° V. 4-135 it is only "when the word
forms at compounds with such words preceding it as ,
yê, y and grí that an additional comes in at the end of the
compound"; and among these latter words, we do not find
with which the compound in question is formed.
68. Some explanation has to be found for such
words as wat and the like.V 2 691
In the line-
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
125
sā dakṣarāvāta sutā samaje |
[She with beautiful teeth gave up her body through wrath
against ] and
śikharikṣate patali raśanā |
['O thou with pointed teeth thy girdle-zone is sliding off']-
We find the words year and faftunt in which the word is
transformed into t; and as we can find no laying down this
transformation, we have to find some explanation for them. The
following have been the two explanations suggested :-(a) 970
V. 4. 145 lays down that "the word er is changed into when
preceded in a compound by words 99, 97, DA, ON, 17 and TUe: and
in this we find the particle which having a cumulative force,
may be taken to include and indicate some other words also, not
mentioned in the ; and among such other words will be the words
g, fraft and such others, compounded with which the word
may be found to be changed into . This is the explanation given
by some people. Others give the following explanation Such
words as those in question should be taken as words [i. e.
words which have their denotation fixed by etymology as well as
by convention]; so that having their denotation fixed partly by
convention, the words may be regarded as 'proper names' and so
coming under º V. 4. 143, by which-"at the end of such filt
compounds as are names, is changed into ." In case the word
y be taken as having its denotation-woman with beautiful teeth-
fixed entirely by its etymology śobhanā: dattāḥ yasyāḥ-then it would not
come under the that restricts the change to proper names only;
but when it is regarded as having its denotation fixed by etymology
as well as by convention, then, though in the former case it would
not be liable to the change in question, in the latter, case it would;
so that the change becomes quite regular as an optional measure.
69. In the compound : we do not find the
additional , because this affix being laid down26
KAVYALAMKARA SUFRA
(in ² IV 4 142) as to be added to
IV 2 70-
the word
cannot be added to compounds ending in
that word.
In the line-
---
gánagãiì fù: yagèrcât trerat: 1
[The demons have their hardened chests torn by the nails of
monkeys),-
We find the fe compound wagère
151 lays down that "when such words as
the end of a gift compound, they take the
reason why this affix does not come in the compound in question,
is that being laid down as to be added to the word , it cannot
be added to a compound ending in that word (according to fÊNÍM
31); that it is to say, the compound wazarra: being expounded as
và gần: àma; if the # were to come in, it would come in after the
compound word gift and not after the words and this would not
be right.
even though vrº IV, 4,
and the like come at
affix;" and the
70. In the word wat the is objectionable;
af being the correct form.
71. For the deletion of the case-termination (of the
first word) in the compound
there is no
authority.
The compound sugar is expounded as a àâ qet:-'she
who has her eyes moving towards the corner'; and in a compound
like this, even in the compounded form, there can be no deletion
of the locative case-termination of the first word; and the
compound would have the form according to 7° VI. 3-12,
44
by which the locative case-ending is not elided after a word
denoting part of the body (with the exception of the words Tit
and ), when such a word is followed by any other word except
the word m.CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
127
Such forms as rara and the ike are
not correct because in such compounds the
assumption of the masculine form by words
originally feminine is not allowed.
-V 2 74[
72
['the man
The compound fx: is expounded as Peer
by whom the loved woman has been embraced'), and TF: as
ray ('the man whose beloved woman is aged'); and here we
find that the words feet and at, which in their original uncompound-
ed form, were feminine, become transformed respectively into the
words fex and ta, this assumption of the masculine form by nouns
originally feminine is not permissible in the case of such agaifa
compounds as end in priyā, kāntara, manojñā, kalyāṇī, subhāgā, durmaṃnā and so on
-according to º VI. 3, 34, by which " in the room of a feminine
word there is substituted an equivalent and uniform masculine
form... but not when this feminine word is followed by another
feminine word, which is either an ordinal numeral or one of the
words under the group."
73. The form
is universally used.
: [it is a
In the a (XII-19) we meet with the word
baṭuvohi compound expounded as haḍhā bhakti yasya] and strictly speaking
the assumption of the masculine form by the feminine word
is not right; as in the compound this word is followed by the
feminine word : which occurs in the above-mentioned f
group; in which case the assumption of the masculine form has
been interdicted by VI. 3-34, referred to in the preceding : and
the only way in which the form of the word can be justified is by
regarding the word g (in the original uncompounded form), not as
a feminine [but as the impersonal or general Neuter; expounding
the compound as ợi vîm: q whereby the compound would fail to
come under the above-mentioned VI, 3-34, which speaks of
a feminine word being changed into the corresponding masculine
form, when followed by another feminine word]
74. Such words as car (ad-gugma) and the like
are justified on the authority of the rule laying
down the shortening of vowels.128
Kayyala KARA SUTRA
[V 2 75-
at we have the word
In the compound
(with the
long) changed into (with the short ): similarly in the
compound yao we have the long of changed into
the short both of these shortenings are in accordance with qu
VI. 3-51, by which-"according to the opinion of a short
vowel is substituted in a compound before the second member,
for the long and -unless it is the long vowel of the feminine
affix kīṭ ."
75 Such words as fe, and the rest must be
regarded as included under the suê group.
Otherwise, in such words as fast and formed by
the words fa and respectively, with the allix agg-the last
vowel of the words fe and would be lengthened, according to
º VI 3-119; by which-" the final vowel of a word consisting of
more than two syllables is lengthened before the affix ggg when it
is a name,-except in the case of the words belonging to the stat
group," and thus the word in question would take the forms frettá
and espectively. Some people hold that the just quoted
, IV. 2.85
refers to only that allix which comes according to
and not to all cases of that affix; but if this were the case, then
there would be nothing to explain the form aar (which is formed
by the word with the ag affix, the last vowel of the former
being lengthened by 47° V1. 3. 119, mentioned above: so if this
were applicable to only those cases of g that come in by
IV. 2, 85, it could not apply to the case of the word sẤT.
44
76. The two forms and are both correct,
being derived from two distinct roots.
We find the two words and both in the sense of
"having heard.' When the participial affix is added to the
root preceded by the preposition , an additional comes in
by q° VI. 4. 56; giving
account for the form
rise to the form frage. How then, to
? The answer is that this latter word is
derived fr m an entirely different root-viz., that, which belongs
to the fourth conjugation; while the form f is from the notV 2 791
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
21
(to see) which belongs to the tenth conjugation, and as such
takes the causal affix for in the reflexive sense, and thereby
comes under trº VI. 4. 56.
and are to be explained as
derived from the root without the accompanying
ṇicū affix.
77. The forms
The question is-how to account for the forms #iqta and fiqtq?
Because in this case aleo, º VI. 4. 56, being applicable, we should
have the forms
and . The answer is that the forms
have to be explained by taking them as derived from the root in
its simple form, without the addition of the affix for which would
bring it under gro VI. 4. 55; this fia is not added, because in the
case of the words in question, the sense of the causal is already
present in the root itself; as we have in the case of the words
Agfa (where also if they were added we would have the form
f); in cases where the sense of the causal is not already
implied in the root, the for comes in necessarily; e. g.,
saṃghamayitumārathyaḥ,
78. The form we must be regarded as derived from
the root (to drink);
and not from the root (to drink); as the participial form
of the latter root, with the affix say would be r; the vowel
being precluded by o VI. 4. 69.
79. The form Te should be explained as due to the
mention of the word 'diverse and irregular"
[in the paribhāṣā.]
F
In regard to the phrase dūrayatyavanate civasvati [ the lowered sun
having moved to a great distance' l-there arises the question
how to account for the form . Because when the noun
takes the causal for it becomes subject to all the rules relating to
words ending in; and as q° VI. 4. 156 is one of those rules,
according to this, the first vowel (in) would be broadened (into
17122
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
IV 2 80-
a) and the syllable would be deleted; and the resultant form
would thereby become ama. The answer is that the aftern'in the
case of nouns serving the purpose of verbal roots, the changes
consequent upon the syllable a come about in diverse irregular
ways "asserts that the changes laid down under v VI. 4. 156,
do not apply strictly to those cases where the word is derived
from a noun treated as a verbal root; hence inasmuch as the word
i is derived from the noun which comes to be treated as a
verbal root, by the addition of the form aflix-it is not necessarily
subject to the changes laid down in VI. 4. 156.
80. In such words as an and the like the presence
of the is absolutely unavoidable.
In the line
harati di vanarājirīcchatī śyāmabhāvam |
The darkening forest ravishes the mind'),
we meet with the present participle t and this is an
incorrect word; the correct form being at the presence of the
being absolutely necessary, by the rule agafin-i.e., the
is necessary in Present participles of the roots of 1st, 4th and 10th
Conjugations and the root belongs to the first Conjugation.]
81. The form
as an adjective qualifying the
neuter noun fè must be explained as due to
the fact of the word being treated as a masculine
noun.
As qualifying a neuter noun, the instrumental form of the
adjective ¶ ahould be my by arº VII. 1. 73, by which-"the
augment 'a' is added to a neuter stem ending in a simple vowel
(except ) before a case-affix beginning with a vowel." The
masculine form therefore can be explained only on the ground
that the word is treated as a masculine noun, in accordance with
qp VII. 1, 74, by which-“ a neuter stem ending in a vowel, of
which there exists an equivalent uniform masculine, is treated likeV 2 82]
CORRECT FORM OF WORDS
123
the masculine in the opinion of me, before the vowel beginning
the affixes of the Instrumental and the cases that follow it."
82. The expression can be explained only by
being broken up into two words.
In the sentence - pamita vatsyasi fat we find the word vetsyasi
which appears like the Second Future form of the root ft to know,
in the second person singular; but the correct form should be
, Therefore the only way to explain is to break it up
into the two words a (second person singular, in the Present
Tense) and this latter word being regarded as an irregular
indeclinable having the sense of 77 ('you'); or as a merely or-
namental supernumerary word. e. g., in the sentence-fa zanîn
Ázamrat i ('O king, you said tru'y.")
83. The word ay is to be regarded as correct only
if its use can be traced to long-established
usage.
The strictly grammatical form of the word is man with an
additional #; but inasmuch as the form is found current in
long-established us 3ge,-as, for instance, in the works of the poet
(and also in f), it can be jus:ified on the ground that all-
rules laying down the insertion of additional letters, such, for
instance, as the syllable a' in -are not meant to be
regarded as strictly obligatory in all cases,
W
84. The forms and i are due to the fact that
with the addition of the ag affix the word
is changed into
and
if
The word
occurring in the gaffe group of words
take the 'r' affix by q° V. I, 130; and by virtue of this affix the
word is changed into and the first vowel is lengthened, -
thereby giving the forms at and e. If [instead of the
added to the words geen and gfe we took the stor as added to the
words and get these latter also occurring in the group),
a24
KAVYALAMKARA SUTRA
IV 2 85
hen we would get the forms enerên and grate because both the
vowels would, in this case, have to be lengthened, in accordance
with r VII. 3. 19, by which the lengthened vowel has to be
substituted for the first vowels of both members of a compcund
ending in I and fry before a H affix having the indicatory
syllable
or 5." (The affix r has the indicatory
85. The noun must be accepted as an anomalous
form (recognised in standard usage).
M
The noun fe is supposed to be derived from the root with
the preposition (f) and aflix qbut such a derivation should give
the form us (and not fita) because the 100t is not one of
those roots that take the ser accent; and as such it does not come
under ¶rª VII, 3, 34, by virtue of which alone the vowel-lengthening
due to could be precluded. Though such is the real fact, yet
we find the form used by man himself in the ways where y c read
yama ipasko (the form uparama being analogous to virama.) In view of such
usage however we have to regard the word as one of those
words which, though anomalous in their derivation, have yet to bo
regarded and used as correct.
86. It is only when the words at &c., are repeated
in the sense af proximity, that they govern the
accusative.
According to the aim on ² 1. 4. 48, when the three words
suft, wit and are: are repeated twice, they goverr the Accusative :
but this would be done only when the words denote proximity,
which meaning of the reduplicated words is laid down in ¶° VIII.
1.7; when, however, their repetition is only for the sake of de i c.,
for implying continuity, then the correlated noun should take the
Genitive affix ;-eg uparyupāra buddhīnāṃ carantīddhayaḥ I the ideas of God
aurpass all other ideas always.")
87. The form
can be correct only when it
does not denote manner.CORRECT
FORM OF WORDS
129
manda
FX XFX ZAÑÊ
manda
udāte
T¶we find the reduplicated form
patrama..
this can
be correct only when the expression does not
denote the manner (of the blowing of the wind); because if it denoted
manner, the repetition would be in accordance with o VIII, 1, 12:
and as all repetitions under this r have to be treated as a
compounds (according to T° Vill-1-12, as read along with VIII-II),
we should have the compounded form. If we have the form
(not denoting manner), the repetition would be in accor-
dance with r VIII-1-4, by which-" the whole is repeated when
il denotes always and each" (in which there is no restriction as to
the repetition being regarded as a compound): the sense of the
repetition in the sentence w gà vaa: 1 being that the 'stillness
of the breeze pervades over each of the various parts of its blowing".
88. The form
V 2 881
In the line
is not correct; as the final
should be changed into 1.
In the line-
nidrādukādraveyacchavi ruparilasadvargharo vārivāha: |
[The rumbling clouds, dark as demons, become distuibers
of sleep').
we find the word Maga which is not correct; as the correct
form of the word should end in according to go VIII-2-27.
has been used by people owing to
The wrong form ending in
their over-fondness for alliteration.
90.
89. In the word the is questionable.
Because the word presents none of the conditions of the change
of the fe into 7 and it is open to doubt if the word occurs in the
a group of words which change their ff either into or
kaskādi
according to VIII-3-48.)
into
{
The former is not right; because there is a
distinct rule laying down the cerebral in the
case.26
In the line,-
KävyĀLA MKĀra Šūtra
mlāyantyakulasapi komalā: kusumalaja: |
[The soft flower-garlands fade even by the touch of the
fingers',--]
The word ay is not right, because the cerebral would
be the correct form; according to a VIII. 3-80, by which-" when
the word is compounded with the word sits is changed
into V'.
[V. 2. 91–
91. The same reason precludes such forms as afabat
indusenā, and the like.
Because tº VIII-3-99, lays down the cerebral for all proper
pū
names like suṣāmā such names as avantisenā indusenā and the like must
be rejected as ungrammatical.
In the line-
92. In the word wat we do not have the cerebral
because it is not intended to express the
idea of being actually carried by the elephant.
kuthena māṃgendramivendravāhanam |
'Like the elephant of
the cmpound
adorned by its coverlet.'- we find
where the syllable is not changed into
even though such a change is laid down by grº VIII, 4 8, by which
-“the a of args is changed into when the word is compounded
with a word which denotes the thing carried by that a," and the
only justification for the non-application of this rule lies in the fact
that it is not intended to denote by the word the thing carried;
all that is meant being the relationship of the possessor and the
possessed; [i.e. the word are means only the
ance belonging to
manner the word
and not the conveyance carrying
is fully justified.
THE END.
or convey-
'); in this
✔
Right and wrong forms of words have been briefly indicated
by me here in this same manner may other words also be
examined.